Research
Somatic rearrangements across cancer reveal classes
of samples with distinct patterns of DNA breakage
and rearrangement-induced hypermutability
Yotam Drier,1,2 Michael S. Lawrence,2 Scott L. Carter,2 Chip Stewart,2 Stacey B. Gabriel,2
Eric S. Lander,2 Matthew Meyerson,2,3 Rameen Beroukhim,2,3 and Gad Getz2,4
1Department of Physics of Complex Systems, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 76100, Israel; 2Broad Institute of MIT
and Harvard, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, USA; 3Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston,
Massachusetts 02215, USA
Whole-genome sequencing using massively parallel sequencing technologies enables accurate detection of somatic rear-
rangements in cancer. Pinpointing large numbers of rearrangement breakpoints to base-pair resolution allows analysis
of rearrangement microhomology and genomic location for every sample. Here we analyze 95 tumor genome sequences
from breast, head and neck, colorectal, and prostate carcinomas, and from melanoma, multiple myeloma, and chronic
lymphocytic leukemia. We discover three genomic factors that are significantly correlated with the distribution of
rearrangements: replication time, transcription rate, and GC content. The correlation is complex, and different patterns
are observed between tumor types, within tumor types, and even between different types of rearrangements. Mutations
in the APC gene correlate with and, hence, potentially contribute to DNA breakage in late-replicating, low %GC, un-
transcribed regions of the genome. We show that somatic rearrangements display less microhomology than germline
rearrangements, and that breakpoint loci are correlated with local hypermutability with a particular enrichment for
C4G transversions.
[Supplemental material is available for this article.]
Alterations in DNA drive much of cancer development. Many of
these alterations are ‘‘structural,’’ leading to fusions between dis-
tant regions of the genome. Many alterations are deletions and
amplifications, which introduce copy-number changes. Others,
such as inversions and balanced translocations, maintain copy
number. Multiple mechanisms can cause these alterations, in-
cluding deterioration of DNA repair and replication mechanisms
(Hoeijmakers 2001; DePinho and Polyak 2004).
Recently, whole-genome sequencing became affordable enough
to allow mapping of rearrangements for large cancer cohorts. This
provides the opportunity to answer several key questions on DNA
breakage in cancer. We and others have started to approach this
by analyzing tumors from individual tumor types (Campbell et al.
2008, 2010; Stephens et al. 2009; Bass et al. 2011; Chapman et al.
2011; Stransky et al. 2011; Totoki et al. 2011; L Wang et al. 2011;
Banerji et al. 2012; Berger et al. 2012), and we have specifically
applied the initial version of the present method in a recent
analysis of prostate cancer (Berger et al. 2011). Here, we study
breakpoint patterns across cancer (95 samples of seven types of
cancer) and extend our previous analysis.
We find three genomic factors that significantly affect the
distribution of DNA breakpoints along the genome: replication
time; proximity to transcribed genes; and GC content. These cor-
relations allow us to hypothesize about the causes and cell-cycle
timing (mitosis/interphase) of the breakage events, and serve as
a basis for future modeling of passenger rearrangements in cancer.
We also identified a significant correlation between breakpoints
and somatic point mutations. Although we cannot formally dis-
tinguish between cause and effect, we ruled out the possibility that
the correlation is merely due to genomic variation in the suscep-
tibility to acquire both types of genome alteration. Furthermore,
pinpointing the precise breakpoints of rearrangements allows
characterization of microhomology, which may suggest potential
mechanisms of rearrangement.
Results
Detecting somatic rearrangements
The growing number of whole-genome sequencing efforts in
cancer is raising the need to accurately pinpoint rearrangement
breakpoints without additional experimental measurements, par-
ticularly due to the high number of breakpoints found. Several
studies to date (Campbell et al. 2008, 2010; Stephens et al. 2009;
Totoki et al. 2011) either published approximate breakpoint loca-
tions or performed additional experiments to pinpoint the break-
points (e.g., by amplification of the region and resequencing). We
recently published several other studies (Bass et al. 2011; Berger
et al. 2011, 2012; Chapman et al. 2011; Stransky et al. 2011; L Wang
et al. 2011; Banerji et al. 2012) in which we pinpoint the break-
points to base-pair resolution using BreakPointer, described here
in detail for the first time (Supplemental Methods; Supplemental
Fig. 1).
In this study, we perform a pan-cancer analysis of rearrange-
ment breakpoints based on WGS data from 95 matched tumor/
normal samples: 24 breast samples sequenced at the Sanger In-
stitute (Stephens et al. 2009) and 71 sequenced at the Broad In-
stitute from various tumor types: 23 multiple myeloma (Chapman
4Corresponding author
Email gadgetz@broadinstitute.org
Article published online before print. Article, supplemental material, and pub-
lication date are at http://www.genome.org/cgi/doi/10.1101/gr.141382.112.
Freely available online through the Genome Research Open Access option.
228
Genome Research
www.genome.org
23:228–235  2013, Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press; ISSN 1088-9051/13; www.genome.org
 
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
 on May 16, 2024 - Published by 
genome.cshlp.org
Downloaded from 

et al. 2011), 22 breast carcinomas (Banerji et al. 2012), nine co-
lorectal carcinomas (Bass et al. 2011), seven prostate (Berger et al.
2011), five melanoma (Berger et al. 2012), three chronic lympho-
cytic leukemia (L Wang et al. 2011), and two head and neck
(Stransky et al. 2011). A total of 4996 candidate and approximate
somatic rearrangements were detected using dRanger (Supple-
mental Methods) in the 71 Broad Institute samples. Out of these,
4368 (87%) were successfully pinpointed to single base-pair reso-
lution using BreakPointer (Supplemental Table 1). We successfully
validated the existence of 1580 out of 1880 (84%) rearrangements
randomly selected for validation by PCR and targeted pyrose-
quencing (Methods), and confirmed the exact pinpointing of 1503
(95%) by aligning the pyrosequencing results to the fused se-
quence predicted by BreakPointer. In the analyses presented below,
we used different data sets—either the 4368 successfully pinpointed
breakpoints or, when relevant, the 4996 candidate rearrangements
(though the additional 628 rearrangements did not significantly
change the results). The additional 24 samples by Stephens et al.
(2009) are used only for the analysis of factors determining the
distribution of breakpoints.
Microhomology of rearrangements
Rearranged DNA segments occasionally share a short stretch of
identical sequence, known as an overlapping microhomology
(Zhu et al. 2002). The base pairing between the two segments being
fused is thought to guide the exact location of the fusion. Knowing
the exact breakpoint allowed us to measure the microhomology
for every rearrangement.
In general, rearrangements display an increased level of micro-
homology, with an average of 1.7 bp instead of the 0.7 bp expected
by chance (a 2.4-fold increase; Wilcoxon P-value < 10250; see
Methods). To study whether this excess of homology occurs in
all types of rearrangements, we classified them into five cate-
gories: (1) short deletions (<5 kb); (2) inversions; (3) tandem dupli-
cations; (4) all other intrachromosomal rearrangements (mostly
deletions); and (5) interchromosomal translocations. All types
showed more microhomology than expected by chance (2.2- to
2.8-fold increase; Wilcoxon P-value < 1025). This is true also for
every type of cancer separately—except for intrachromosomal
rearrangements in CLL, all types with 10 or more rearrange-
ments showed significant increase, FDR < 10%. The short micro-
homologies imply the involvement of nonhomologous end join-
ing (NHEJ) or microhomology-mediated end joining (MMEJ) in
almost all somatic rearrangements (only 0.2% of detected rear-
rangements displayed >20 bp homology). MMEJ is rare, while NHEJ
is quite frequent (only 2.5% of rearrangements had >5-bp micro-
homology, 44.2% at least 2 bp, but at most 5 bp). Even when
comparing only with nonhomologous germline rearrangements
in 185 human genomes (Mills et al. 2011), we found that the
microhomologies of somatic rearrangements detected in our
cohort were shorter (average of 1.7 bp vs. 2.2 bp, Mann–Whitney
P-value < 5.4 3 1014), and MMEJ less frequent (6.6% of non-
homologous germline rearrangements had >5-bp microhomology,
46.6% at least 2 bp, but at most 5 bp). Recently, complex rear-
rangements in the germline were characterized in several indi-
viduals (Chiang et al. 2012), which showed less microhomology
than Mills et al. (2011). These complex germline events are closer
to the somatic events described here in terms of the overall micro-
homology distribution (average 1.43 bp, Mann–Whitney P-value <
0.012), probably due to less NHEJ and more MMEJ (5.7% had >5-bp
microhomology, 28.6% at least 2 bp, but at most 5 bp).
The distribution of microhomology lengths varied by the
type of rearrangement (Scholz-Stephens’ P-value < 106; see
Methods). Tandem duplications had the most distinctive distri-
bution, with 2 bp (typical for nonhomologous end joining) being
the most common overlap across all tumor types (as we previously
reported in colorectal cancer) (Bass et al. 2011). Short deletions
and inversions displayed a similar pattern (Fig. 1A). Difference in
microhomologies, and specifically more frequent microhomologies
in tandem duplications, was previously reported for breast cancer
(Stephens et al. 2009).
Each sample had a different composition of rearrangement
types (Supplemental Fig. 2), and therefore differences between
the microhomology distributions of different samples are to be
expected. However, even when controlling for the sample-specific
composition and using the overall microhomology pattern for
each type, six of the 71 samples (8%) still had a significantly
different distribution (FDR < 4%) (Fig. 1B; Methods). Three
prostate samples displayed less microhomology than expected by
their composition, while three breast samples displayed more,
suggesting mechanistic differences not only between the differ-
ent types of rearrangements, but also between prostate, breast,
and other cancers. Indeed, when pooling all breast samples to-
gether, they show more microhomology than expected by their
composition (P < 106), and all prostate samples pooled show less
microhomology than expected (P < 106).
Factors determining the distribution of breakpoints
Next, we examined genomic features to identify ones that may
affect, or at least are correlated with the density of rearrangement
breakpoints along the genome. First, we examined whether the
distribution of breakpoints was correlated with local transcrip-
tion levels typical for that tumor type (Methods). As for micro-
homologies, we observed strong sample-specific effects with differ-
ent samples showing opposite behaviors—some with significant
enrichment of breakpoints near transcribed genes (most pro-
nouncedly within 10-kb windows) and others with significant
depletion (Fig. 2).
Subsequently, we examined the correlation with two addi-
tional factors that may affect the location of rearrangements—
DNA replication time and GC content. We first considered the
effect of each factor separately and partitioned the genome into
three or four distinct parts according to the level of each factor.
We then calculated, for each sample, the relative rate of break-
points in every part of the genome (represented as log fold-change
to the genome-wide average) and a significance level (Fig. 3A;
Methods). Interestingly, the majority of samples showed enrich-
ment of breakpoints either at early replicating, high %GC, tran-
scribed regions of the genome (EHT), or at late-replicating, low
%GC, untranscribed (LLU) regions. The fact that the effects of
these three variables are correlated is not surprising since they are
mostly correlated along the genome. Studying the enrichment
patterns across cancer revealed tumor-type-specific patterns;
CLL, and breast cancer samples tend to have breakpoints at EHT
regions, while colorectal cancer, melanoma, and head and neck
cancer samples tend to have breakpoints in the LLU regions (Fig. 3B).
Four samples showed contradictory patterns of LLU and EHT,
deviating from the above pattern, suggesting that, at least in these
cases, more than one factor is required to explain the density of
breakpoints. The colorectal sample CRC-3 was enriched for break-
points in late-replicating, untranscribed regions, but depleted in
regions of low %GC. The multiple myeloma sample MMRC0421
Genome Research
229
www.genome.org
Somatic rearrangements across cancer
 
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
 on May 16, 2024 - Published by 
genome.cshlp.org
Downloaded from 

and melanoma sample ME0032 harbored breakpoints in un-
transcribed regions, but also in regions with high GC content,
and the breast sample PD3668a was depleted in both low %GC
and high %GC.
These inconsistent patterns can be somewhat explained by
examining the contribution of each type of rearrangement sepa-
rately. Surprisingly, in these samples, different types of rearrange-
ments follow different patterns of enrichment. For the melanoma
sample ME0032 (Supplemental Fig. 3), interchromosomal trans-
locations and intrachromosomal inversions and tandem du-
plications were enriched in regions of high %GC, while other
intrachromosomal events were skewed toward low %GC and
untranscribed regions. Similarly, for multiple myeloma sample
MMRC0421 intrachromosomal rearrangements contributed to
enrichment in untranscribed, low %GC regions, while inversions
were enriched in high %GC.
In order to quantify the joint contribution of all three pa-
rameters and attain a compact representation, we used logistic
regression (Methods; Supplemental Fig. 4). This type of analysis
requires a large number of rearrangements in order to uncover
significant results, and so only the most highly rearranged samples
are amenable. To cope with this challenge, we pooled together
several samples of the same cancer type. In contrast to the outliers
described above, it seems that the general rule is for rearrange-
ments of different types (deletion, inversion, etc.) to be distributed
similarly to each other; however, we cannot rule out some can-
cellation of opposite effects due to pooling of samples.
Next, we searched for genes with mutations that are corre-
lated with the different patterns of rearrangements (LLU or EHT).
Interestingly, we identified APC as the only gene whose muta-
tions (in the coding region or promoter) are significantly asso-
ciated with the LLU-enriched samples (q < 0.05; Methods). The
adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene is mutated in eight of
the 71 samples, seven of which are included in the 19 LLU samples
(Fisher’s exact test; P = 104, q = 0.017). APC binds to and stabilizes
microtubules, and is necessary to keep chromosomal integrity
Figure 2.
Breakpoints in transcribed and untranscribed regions. Each square represents enrichment (red) or depletion (blue) of breakpoints in tran-
scribed regions defined by maximal distance to transcribed gene. Size represents P-value, and color represents ratio. Only tests that passed 10% FDR are
shown. Notice that regions of ;104 bp were often significantly enriched or depleted. (Right) The average ratio (across samples). The colored bar above
specifies the type of cancer for each sample.
Figure 1.
Overlapping microhomology. (A) By rearrangement type. (Gray line) The expected distribution, by permuting rearrangement pairs. All
rearrangement types show higher microhomology than expected by chance. Tandem duplications display the highest microhomology rate with
microhomology of length 2 being the most common case. Short deletions (up to 5 kb) and inversions show more microhomology than other rear-
rangements. Scholz-Stephens P-value for significant difference between histograms is <106. (B) Rearrangement count by sample for six extreme samples.
(Gray line) The expected distribution, controlled for the composition of the different rearrangement types. The three prostate samples show less
microhomology than expected (notice the high fraction of breakpoints with no microhomology), and the three breast samples show more (low fraction of
breakpoints with no microhomology). Expected distribution was constructed to control for the different rearrangement types and the homologies they
display in our cohort. These are the only samples passing FDR < 10% (and in fact satisfy FDR < 4%).
Drier et al.
230
Genome Research
www.genome.org
 
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
 on May 16, 2024 - Published by 
genome.cshlp.org
Downloaded from 

during mitosis (Kaplan et al. 2001; Guerrero et al. 2010). Defects
in APC might, therefore, lead to chromosome breakage during
aberrant mitosis, or disrupt mechanisms that protect or repair
heterochromatin regions. APC is known to be highly mutated in
colorectal cancers (;70%–80%) (Fearon 2011; The Cancer Ge-
nome Atlas Network 2012) and, indeed, all six colorectal samples
with an APC mutation were LLU, and the remaining three were
not. This explains the high prevalence of LLUs in colorectal cancer.
This might suggest that the correlation to APC mutations is merely
due to colorectal cancer being a confounding variable, and require
further study on larger cohorts.
Hypermutability near breakpoints
Analysis of the relationship between the sites of somatic muta-
tions and rearrangements showed that the rate of somatic single-
nucleotide variations is significantly elevated near breakpoints
(Fig. 4A; Methods). The effect can be detected in very close prox-
imity to the breakpoint, but it becomes even stronger when cal-
culated across 100 bp–1 kb surroundings. Notice that the windows
are nonoverlapping, i.e., each window has a ‘‘hole’’ in the middle
associated with the previous smaller window, and therefore the
hypermutability is detectable also in regions far from the break-
point. The increase in mutation frequency in a 1-kb window
around breakpoints often reaches a staggering 1003–30003 fold
for several samples (Fig. 4B). The relationship between hypermuta-
bility and rearrangements was noted previously in various contexts
(De and Babu 2010), and we also previously showed it specifically
for prostate cancer (Berger et al. 2011). Here we demonstrate that
this is true across many cancer types.
The hypermutation cannot simply be explained by rear-
rangement and mutations occurring in the same regions of the
genome that are hyper-susceptible to all forms of genomic aber-
rations in all cases. We examined regions defined by the rear-
rangements of any given sample, and looked for mutations in
those regions in all other samples of the same cancer type. While
sometimes we indeed noted elevated mutation rates (coinciding
with the hypothesis of fragile and hypermutable genomic regions),
there were almost always significantly more mutations (;163
increase in density) in samples identified by comparing with the
genome-wide average (Fig. 4C).
The spectrum of the mutations surrounding breakpoints
is significantly different from the spectrum over the entire ge-
nome, as can be seen in Figure 4D, with C4G transversions being
most highly enriched. C4G transversions were suggested to be
caused by oxidative DNA damage (Kino and Sugiyama 2001, 2005)
and by base excision repair via uracil-DNA glycosylase and REV1
translesion synthesis (Jansen et al. 2006; Ross and Sale 2006).
C4G transversions are known to be enriched in breast cancer
(Stephens et al. 2005), where they tend to occur in a TpC (or GpA
for G ! C) dinucleotide context. A similar context-specific pat-
tern also holds in lung cancer, ovarian cancer, and melanoma
(Greenman et al. 2007; Rubin and Green 2009). Mutations in that
context are consistent with a DNA deamination by apolipoprotein
B mRNA-editing enzymes (APOBEC1 and several APOBEC3 pro-
teins) (Beale et al. 2004; Bishop et al. 2004). We confirmed the
enrichment of C4G transversions in the TpC context, but also
observed that this effect is significantly higher near breakpoints.
Out of 25 samples that have more than five C4G transversions
near breakpoints (1 kb or less), nine (five breast cancer, two
melanoma, and two multiple myeloma) displayed significant en-
richment of TpC context compared with transversions far from
breakpoints (FDR < 5%, Fisher’s exact test).
One of the features of the translesion synthesis that we sug-
gested above is that it acts upon one of the strands, and therefore
only this strand will be mutated by the deamination. Indeed, two
multiple myeloma samples (MMRC0344 and MMRC0392) and
four breast samples (BR-V-004, BR-V-006, BR-V-008, and BR-V-010)
had a least one breakpoint with significant strand specificity
(FDR < 10%, see Methods).
Figure 3.
Breakpoint distribution as a function of transcription, replication, and GC content across samples. (A) Each row represents a different bin of
replication time, GC content, or distance from transcribed gene. Each square represents significant (FDR < 10%) enrichment or depletion, size represents
P-value, and color represents ratio. Only samples with at least one significant bin are shown. The colored bar above specifies the type of cancer for each
sample. Most samples are either enriched for breakpoints in early replicating, high %GC transcribed regions of the genome (EHT), or in late replicating,
low %GC untranscribed regions (LLU), as can be seen in the bar chart. The samples are sorted by the agreement with that pattern. (B) The breaking of each
cancer to EHT (red), LLU (blue) and gray samples (without any significant extreme bin, or with contradicting enrichments).
Somatic rearrangements across cancer
Genome Research
231
www.genome.org
 
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
 on May 16, 2024 - Published by 
genome.cshlp.org
Downloaded from 

Recently, clusters of mutations were discovered in breast
cancer, a phenomenon termed kataegis (Nik-Zainal et al. 2012) as
well as in yeast and other types of cancer (Roberts et al. 2012).
Some of those clusters were colocalized with rearrangements.
Nik-Zainal et al. (2012) identified five mutational signatures by
statistical inference, two of which (B and E) were found to be en-
riched in the kategis events. Signature E is mainly C4G trans-
versions in TpC context, and signature B is a combination of C4G
and C ! T in TpC context. Our results are consistent with their
findings, namely, hypermutation near breakpoints, enrichment of
C4G mutations in TpC context, and strand specificity.
Discussion
We identified three genomic factors that significantly affect, in a
sample-specific manner, the distribution of breakpoints: GC con-
tent, transcription, and replication time. The scales on which
transcription affects the distribution of breakpoints suggest that
the main effect is through the 3D DNA structure of the genome,
i.e., the different open/closed chromatin compartments (present
mostly during interphase). DNA replication time suggests colocal-
ization, mostly during replication (Meister et al. 2006; Ryba et al.
2010), and was shown to affect rearrangements in bacteria (Eisen
et al. 2000; Tillier and Collins 2000) and has been recently sug-
gested for cancer as well (De and Michor 2011). GC content might
affect breakpoint distribution by sequence-dependent mecha-
nisms (such as homology), or may simply be correlated to other
biologically relevant factors. We show that the three factors, al-
though highly correlated, are not redundant, and each may con-
tribute differently in different contexts, e.g., in different samples
and in different rearrangement types. We previously showed some
correlation between breakpoints and transcription for prostate
samples (Berger et al. 2011); here, we extend our analysis and offer
a possible explanation. This genomic scale is consistent with re-
cent discoveries that during interphase, transcription occurs in
distinct compartments in the nucleus, and that untranscribed re-
gions occupy other compartments (Lanctot et al. 2007; Guelen
et al. 2008; Lieberman-Aiden et al. 2009; Yaffe and Tanay 2011). It
is known that breakpoint-pairs of individual rearrangements often
occur in nearby segments of the DNA (Meaburn et al. 2007; Mani
and Chinnaiyan 2010; De and Michor 2011; Fudenberg et al. 2011;
Klein et al. 2011). However, we find that many breakpoints, be-
longing to different rearrangements, also tend to occur in some
samples in transcribed/early replicating compartments, and in
others in untranscribed/late replicating compartments. This is not
an artifact due to the vicinity of breakpoint-pairs of individual
rearrangements, as a similar pattern is observed when randomly
selecting only one breakpoint of each rearrangement and re-
peating the analysis (Supplemental Fig. 5). This observation is
consistent with a model in which one or more events has occurred,
each causing several breakpoints within the same compartment,
perhaps due to a strong DNA damaging event (as suggested to cause
Figure 4.
Hypermutability near breakpoints. (A) Enrichment of mutations across all samples by mutation type. Square represents mutation rate in
concentric nonoverlapping exponential windows around each breakpoint, compared with overall mutation rates in the 71 samples cohort, aggregating
them together. Size represents P-value, and color represents ratio. Only significant (FDR < 10%) results are shown. Hypermutation can be seen in a close
proximity of the breakpoint, but it is even stronger in 100 bp to 1 kb surroundings. (B) Similar analysis per sample in 1-kb windows reveals that for
some samples the mutation rate can reach 10003–30003 fold. (C ) Hypermutation is not only due to rearrangement and mutations occurring in the
same ‘‘bad’’ regions of the genome. For each sample we defined the 1-kb regions according to their rearrangements and measured the mutations in those
regions in all other samples of the same cancer type, aggregating them together. Squares represent P-value (by size) and ratio (by color) comparing the
mutation rate in each selected sample to the mutation rate at the other samples of the same cancer type. Any sample with significant hypermutation
displays significant elevation in mutation rate near breakpoints of that sample. (D) Mutation spectrum near breakpoints compared with spectrum across
the genome of that sample. Hypermutated samples are often skewed toward C4G transversions near breakpoints. Melanoma samples show depletion of
C ! T transitions near breakpoints due to high C ! T transitions across the genome.
Drier et al.
232
Genome Research
www.genome.org
 
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
 on May 16, 2024 - Published by 
genome.cshlp.org
Downloaded from 

chromothripsis [Stephens et al. 2011] when occurring during
metaphase). Incorrect fusion of the resulting nearby fragments then
yields the observed rearrangements. Moreover, we suggest APC de-
ficiency as a mechanism that may contribute to DNA breakage in late
replicating, low %GC, untranscribed regions of the genome, during
or after mitosis. However, the accuracy of our findings regarding
transcription and replication may be imperfect, as we did not mea-
sure transcription and replication in the specific tumor samples
analyzed here. Reassuringly, time of replication is mostly constant
in different tissues (Farkash-Amar and Simon 2010). To make sure
that the small difference in the patterns of transcription does not
have a big impact, we have deduced the expression profile for each
type of cancer separately. Moreover, repeating the analysis with
different expression profiles yielded similar results (data not shown).
This data-driven model of the breakpoint distribution is not
predictive at this point and requires the full analysis of breakpoints in
each sample. Due to the complexity of the effects, we believe that
such an approach is necessary to assess the significance of driver
rearrangements across cancer. Since the cohort size is still a limiting
factor, statistical inference of the causes of the different behavior of
different samples is not yet possible. However, with the large number
of cancer whole-genome sequences becoming available, this is
expected to change in the near future, allowing similar methodology
to provide an understanding of different biological processes that
contribute to the variability across samples and types of alterations.
Integrative analysis of mutations and exact breakpoints re-
vealed a global hypermutability near breakpoints, common to al-
most all samples. We suggest that the hypermutability might be re-
lated to base excision repair caused by APOBEC deamination, which
can cause both DNA breakage and the mutations that we observe
near breakpoints. Moreover, the strand-specific pattern in some of
the samples may suggest that it is caused by translesion synthesis,
which is known to occur in base excision repair. This emphasizes the
complexity of understanding the deterioration of genome stability,
the effect of different DNA repair mechanisms, and the need to in-
tegrate the different data types in order to better understand them. It
also has a practical impact on modeling of background mutation
rates in cancer. The different mutation spectrums near rearrange-
ments suggests that different mechanisms generate or repair these
mutations, and may help point to these mechanisms. Further study
is required to understand the relationship between breakpoints and
the processes that govern mutation spectra.
Methods
Data and preprocessing
The data used for the analysis was whole-genome shotgun se-
quencing performed as described in the references (Berger et al.
2011; Chapman et al. 2011). Candidate chromosomal rearrange-
ments were identified from the observation of multiple discordant
read pairs using dRanger (Supplemental Methods). BreakPointer was
originally designed to use MAQ (Li et al. 2008) alignments, but was
also adapted to BWA (Li and Durbin 2009). BWA later introduced
advanced clipping features, making the identification of split reads
easier by allowing the use of alternative rearrangement detection
algorithms such as CREST (J Wang et al. 2011). Breast and head and
neck samples were aligned using BWA, all other samples using MAQ.
Validation
Rearrangements predicted by dRanger (with at least three support-
ing discordant reads) were validated by PCR, followed by pooled 454
Life Sciences (Roche) sequencing. PCR primers were designed using
Primer3 (Rozen and Skaletsky 2000), such that they spanned the
predicted chimeric junction and would produce an amplicon ;300–
350 bp long. PCRs were performed on whole-genome amplified
product for both tumor and normal DNA (For somatic breakpoints,
only the tumor DNA would be expected to yield a product). Each
PCR product was quantified using a NanoDrop Spectrophotometer
(Thermo Scientific). PCR products were pooled such that: (1) Equal
amounts of tumor products were combined, (2) the same volumes
were taken from the corresponding normal products, and (3)
matching tumor and normal products were placed in separate
pools. Libraries for 454 sequencing were prepared from each pool
and sequenced in separate regions of a 454 Genome Sequencer FLX
System (454 Life Sciences). Primer sequences served as unique
barcodes for identifying the source PCR product for each 454 read.
A rearrangement was judged to be somatic if the predicted chimeric
product was detectable in tumor DNA and not normal DNA.
To validate BreakPointer results, the fused sequence gener-
ated by BreakPointer was aligned by Smith and Waterman (1981)
to all of the sequences of the appropriate amplicons (or their re-
verse complement). For each amplicon, the alignment was de-
clared to be successful if it contained no gaps in a 20-bp window
around the breakpoint (to ensure exact pinpointing) and at least
95 matches in a 100-bp window. Notice that since BreakPointer fuses
the reference genome, some mismatches with cancer genomes are
expected (due to germline and somatic point variations).
Statistical analysis of microhomologies
Wilcoxon rank-sum test was used to compare the observed micro-
homology distribution with the expected background for each type
of rearrangement separately. The background for each test is based on
hypothetical rearrangements constructed by taking all possible
breakpoint pairs among the breakpoints belonging to a particular
rearrangement type, and then computing the distribution of micro-
homologies in this set of hypothetical rearrangements. To evaluate
the difference between the histograms of the different rearrangement
types, we used Scholz-Stephens’ k-sample Anderson-Darling statistic
(Scholz and Stephens 1987) to measure the similarity between the
histograms. We then tested the significance of this value based on 106
sets of ‘‘permuted’’ histograms generated under the null hypothesis
in which the histograms are, in fact, not different. To generate each
set of histograms, we randomly permuted the observed micro-
homology among the five rearrangement types. We then computed
the Anderson-Darling statistic for each set, and the P-value is simply
the fraction of sets with greater or equal Anderson-Darling statistics
than the original five histograms. To evaluate the contribution of the
short deletions and the tandem duplications to the significance, we
repeated the analysis omitting one or both. Excluding the short de-
letions and keeping the tandem duplications yields histograms that
are still significantly different (P < 106). However, when removing
the tandem duplications and keeping the short deletions, the results
are less significant (P = 0.03), and when omitting both the histo-
grams, are no longer significantly different (P = 0.15).
To detect a significant deviation of the average microhomol-
ogy from that expected, in a given sample we calculated empirical
P-values by comparing the observed average microhomology to
a background distribution that controlled the composition of re-
arrangement types in the sample. For each sample, the background
distribution was constructed by sampling 106 times the appropriate
number of rearrangements of each type. We capped the micro-
homology at 6 bp to eliminate the unwanted effect of inflating
the average due to a few rearrangements with large homology.
Similarly, for the cancer-type-specific analysis, all samples of the
same cancer-type were pooled together and deviations from the
appropriate background of the pool were calculated.
Somatic rearrangements across cancer
Genome Research
233
www.genome.org
 
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
 on May 16, 2024 - Published by 
genome.cshlp.org
Downloaded from 

Usually microhomology is defined by perfect homology.
However, biological mechanisms mediating microhomology
might induce imperfect homology (i.e., sequence similarity of
<100%). To assess our sensitivity we also attempted to define re-
arrangement with microhomology by requiring at least five matches
and up to two mismatches (i.e., sequence similarity >71%). Only
12% of those rearrangements did not have 2-bp perfect micro-
homology, yielding no significant change in any aspect by adding
this new definition. No correlation (r = 0.009, P = 0.53) was
detected between microhomology and coverage, excluding the
possibility of a detection bias due to coverage.
Breakpoint distribution statistical analysis
Enrichment and depletion of breakpoints in different regions of
the genome, defined by replication time, GC content, and distance
to transcribed gene, were computed by random generated distri-
butions controlled for chromosome and coverage. First, nearby
breakpoints (up to 2500 bp away) were consolidated into a single
‘‘event.’’ This was needed since nearby breakpoints were probably
a result of one DNA breakage event. Controlling for chromosome
was required to avoid artifacts resulting just from the chromosome
identity. These steps are specifically important for short deletions
and in the presence of complex events (such as balanced trans-
locations [Berger et al. 2011] or variants of chromothripsis [Stephens
et al. 2011]) that occur in several of the samples, as we previously
reported (Bass et al. 2011; Berger et al. 2011, 2012). Controlling for
coverage (using the average coverage of all samples aligned to the
same genome build) was needed because the ability to detect rear-
rangements depended on coverage (Supplemental Fig. 6).
For each event, 100,000 locations (one per iteration) were
generated uniformly from all locations on the same chromosome
having the same coverage (quantizing the average coverage across all
samples mapped to the same genome build in steps of five). The
genome was binned to the following bins: low GC (0%–36%), me-
dium GC (36%–45%), and high GC (45%–100%). Transcribed re-
gions (transcribed gene in 100 kb), medium (100–500 kb), and
untranscribed regions (no transcribed gene in 500 kb) (see definition
below of transcribed gene). Replication time was binned according to
late/early ratio (Ryba et al. 2010) at (-N,-0.8],(-0.8,0], (0,0.8],(0.8,N).
Changing the thresholds did not affect the essence of the results
other than losing sensitivity for too small or too big bins (data not
shown). For every bin we counted the number of breakpoints for
both the observed breakpoints and the random breakpoints. All of
these counts were used to compute nonparametric P-values (ob-
served rates). Enrichment or depletion was determined by picking
the lower of the one-sided P-values, and P-values were then corrected
for multiple hypotheses by the Benjamini-Hochberg FDR procedure
(Benjamini and Hochberg 1995). Logistic regression was used to
study the effect of each parameter on the probability of having
a breakpoint. The number of breakpoints that fall in each bin is
modeled as a binomial distribution with probability p. Logistic re-
gression models log(p/(1-p)) as a linear combination of the binned
covariates (%GC, transcription and replication time), where each
covariate is assigned a value (evenly spaced between 1 and 1) to
represent its bin. To train the model we used the observed break-
points as ‘‘successes’’ and the permuted breakpoints (from the en-
richment test, see above) to represent the ‘‘failures.’’
Transcribed genes were identified by picking the 10,000 most-
expressed genes on average from a matching data set, as de-
scribed in the Supplemental Methods. DNA replication time data
for H7 hESC cells was obtained from reference (Ryba et al. 2010),
remapping to hg19 build was done via UCSC Genome Browser’s
tool liftOver. The GC content was called in 100-kb windows. The
only noticeable effect of using 10-kb or 1-Mbp windows was
equivalent to slightly shifting the bin thresholds (as the smaller
the windows size is, the more disperse the GC distribution).
To look for genes mutated in LLU or EHT samples, we exam-
ined all mutations within genes, other than silent mutations or
mutations in introns (but including mutations in promoters and
UTR). We chose only genes that have the potential to be differen-
tially mutated, i.e., those mutated in at least three samples, which
are not mutated in at least three samples within our LLU and EHT
samples. Fisher’s exact test was used to calculate the probability of
a gene to be mutated in as many LLU or EHT samples.
Mutation rate statistical analysis
To test for enrichment of mutations near breakpoints, the same
generated background distribution described above was used to
count how many breakpoints had at least one mutation in any
given window around the breakpoint. As breakpoints with a nearby
mutation are rare events, Poisson distribution was assumed to infer
P-values. When comparing to several samples together (Fig. 4A,C),
mutations were aggregated into one virtual sample with all the
mutations. To test for the enrichment/depletion of transitions and
transversions near breakpoints, we performed a Fisher’s exact test for
each sample on the number of mutations of each type near break-
points versus their distribution over all of the genome. A similar
Fisher’s exact test was used to compare TpC ! TpG out of all C4G
transversions, near breakpoints and over all of the genome. Fisher’s
exact test was also used to compare the mutation enrichment near
breakpoints with the enrichment of mutations in other samples of
the same tumor type in the same regions. To compute the frequency
of mutations over all of the genome and near rearrangements,
mutations of each type were counted and divided by the total
number of base pairs of the appropriate type that were covered
enough to call for mutations.
To estimate the strand specificity of mutations near break-
points, we examined all of the 10-kb windows around breakpoints
that had at least 15 mutations. Mutation rate in the window was
calculated on both strands (e.g., C ! T and G ! A together), and
then binomial distribution was used to estimate the probability of
having as many mutations on a single strand in that window (e.g.,
either C ! T or G ! A).
Software availability
BreakPointer is available at http://www.broadinstitute.org/cancer/
cga/BreakPointer.
Acknowledgments
We are grateful to Professor Eytan Domany of the Weizmann In-
stitute of Science for his advice and support.
Author contributions: Y.D. designed the study, performed data
analysis and wrote the paper; M.S.L. provided new analytical tools
and developed the manuscript; S.L.C., C.S., S.G., E.S.L., M.M., and
R.B. developed the manuscript; G.G. designed the study, provided
new analytical tools, and wrote the paper.
References
Banerji S, Cibulskis K, Rangel-Escareno C, Brown KK, Carter SL, Frederick AM,
Lawrence MS, Sivachenko AY, Sougnez C, Zou L, et al. 2012. Sequence
analysis of mutations and translocations across breast cancer subtypes.
Nature 486: 405–409.
Bass AJ, Lawrence MS, Brace LE, Ramos AH, Drier Y, Cibulskis K, Sougnez C,
Voet D, Saksena G, Sivachenko A, et al. 2011. Genomic sequencing of
colorectal adenocarcinomas identifies a recurrent VTI1A-TCF7L2 fusion.
Nat Genet 43: 964–968.
Drier et al.
234
Genome Research
www.genome.org
 
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
 on May 16, 2024 - Published by 
genome.cshlp.org
Downloaded from 

Beale RC, Petersen-Mahrt SK, Watt IN, Harris RS, Rada C, Neuberger MS.
2004. Comparison of the differential context-dependence of DNA
deamination by APOBEC enzymes: Correlation with mutation spectra
in vivo. J Mol Biol 337: 585–596.
Benjamini Y, Hochberg Y. 1995. Controlling the false discovery rate: A
practical and powerful approach to multiple testing. J R Stat Soc Ser B
Methodol 57: 289–300.
Berger MF, Lawrence MS, Demichelis F, Drier Y, Cibulskis K, Sivachenko AY,
Sboner A, Esgueva R, Pflueger D, Sougnez C, et al. 2011. The genomic
complexity of primary human prostate cancer. Nature 470: 214–220.
Berger MF, Hodis E, Heffernan TP, Deribe YL, Lawrence MS, Protopopov A,
Ivanova E, Watson IR, Nickerson E, Ghosh P, et al. 2012. Melanoma genome
sequencing reveals frequent PREX2 mutations. Nature 485: 502–506.
Bishop KN, Holmes RK, Sheehy AM, Davidson NO, Cho SJ, Malim MH.
2004. Cytidine deamination of retroviral DNA by diverse APOBEC
proteins. Curr Biol 14: 1392–1396.
Campbell PJ, Stephens PJ, Pleasance ED, O’Meara S, Li H, Santarius T,
Stebbings LA, Leroy C, Edkins S, Hardy C, et al. 2008. Identification of
somatically acquired rearrangements in cancer using genome-wide
massively parallel paired-end sequencing. Nat Genet 40: 722–729.
Campbell PJ, Yachida S, Mudie LJ, Stephens PJ, Pleasance ED, Stebbings LA,
Morsberger LA, Latimer C, McLaren S, Lin ML, et al. 2010. The patterns
and dynamics of genomic instability in metastatic pancreatic cancer.
Nature 467: 1109–1113.
The Cancer Genome Atlas Network. 2012. Comprehensive molecular
characterization of human colon and rectal cancer. Nature 487: 330–337.
Chapman MA, Lawrence MS, Keats JJ, Cibulskis K, Sougnez C, Schinzel AC,
Harview CL, Brunet JP, Ahmann GJ, Adli M, et al. 2011. Initial genome
sequencing and analysis of multiple myeloma. Nature 471: 467–472.
Chiang C, Jacobsen JC, Ernst C, Hanscom C, Heilbut A, Blumenthal I, Mills
RE, Kirby A, Lindgren AM, Rudiger SR, et al. 2012. Complex
reorganization and predominant non-homologous repair following
chromosomal breakage in karyotypically balanced germline
rearrangements and transgenic integration. Nat Genet 44: 390–397.
De S, Babu MM. 2010. A time-invariant principle of genome evolution.
Proc Natl Acad Sci 107: 13004–13009.
De S, Michor F. 2011. DNA replication timing and long-range DNA
interactions predict mutational landscapes of cancer genomes.
Nat Biotechnol 29: 1103–1108.
DePinho RA, Polyak K. 2004. Cancer chromosomes in crisis. Nat Genet 36:
932–934.
Eisen JA, Heidelberg JF, White O, Salzberg SL. 2000. Evidence for symmetric
chromosomal inversions around the replication origin in bacteria.
Genome Biol 1: RESEARCH0011.
Farkash-Amar S, Simon I. 2010. Genome-wide analysis of the replication
program in mammals. Chromosome Res 18: 115–125.
Fearon ER. 2011. Molecular genetics of colorectal cancer. Annu Rev Pathol 6:
479–507.
Fudenberg G, Getz G, Meyerson M, Mirny LA. 2011. High order chromatin
architecture shapes the landscape of chromosomal alterations in cancer.
Nat Biotechnol 29: 1109–1113.
Greenman C, Stephens P, Smith R, Dalgliesh GL, Hunter C, Bignell G, Davies
H, Teague J, Butler A, Stevens C, et al. 2007. Patterns of somatic mutation
in human cancer genomes. Nature 446: 153–158.
Guelen L, Pagie L, Brasset E, Meuleman W, Faza MB, Talhout W, Eussen BH,
de Klein A, Wessels L, de Laat W, et al. 2008. Domain organization of
human chromosomes revealed by mapping of nuclear lamina
interactions. Nature 453: 948–951.
Guerrero AA, Gamero MC, Trachana V, Futterer A, Pacios-Bras C, Diaz-
Concha NP, Cigudosa JC, Martinez AC, van Wely KH. 2010.
Centromere-localized breaks indicate the generation of DNA damage by
the mitotic spindle. Proc Natl Acad Sci 107: 4159–4164.
Hoeijmakers JH. 2001. Genome maintenance mechanisms for preventing
cancer. Nature 411: 366–374.
Jansen JG, Langerak P, Tsaalbi-Shtylik A, van den Berk P, Jacobs H, de Wind N.
2006. Strand-biased defect in C/G transversions in hypermutating
immunoglobulin genes in Rev1-deficient mice. J Exp Med 203: 319–323.
Kaplan KB, Burds AA, Swedlow JR, Bekir SS, Sorger PK, Nathke IS. 2001.
A role for the Adenomatous Polyposis Coli protein in chromosome
segregation. Nat Cell Biol 3: 429–432.
Kino K, Sugiyama H. 2001. Possible cause of G-C!C-G transversion mutation
by guanine oxidation product, imidazolone. Chem Biol 8: 369–378.
Kino K, Sugiyama H. 2005. UVR-induced G-C to C-G transversions from
oxidative DNA damage. Mutat Res 571: 33–42.
Klein IA, Resch W, Jankovic M, Oliveira T, Yamane A, Nakahashi H,
Di Virgilio M, Bothmer A, Nussenzweig A, Robbiani DF, et al. 2011.
Translocation-capture sequencing reveals the extent and nature of
chromosomal rearrangements in B lymphocytes. Cell 147: 95–106.
Lanctot C, Cheutin T, Cremer M, Cavalli G, Cremer T. 2007. Dynamic
genome architecture in the nuclear space: Regulation of gene expression
in three dimensions. Nat Rev Genet 8: 104–115.
Li H, Durbin R. 2009. Fast and accurate short read alignment with Burrows-
Wheeler transform. Bioinformatics 25: 1754–1760.
Li H, Ruan J, Durbin R. 2008. Mapping short DNA sequencing reads and
calling variants using mapping quality scores. Genome Res 18: 1851–1858.
Lieberman-Aiden E, van Berkum NL, Williams L, Imakaev M, Ragoczy T,
Telling A, Amit I, Lajoie BR, Sabo PJ, Dorschner MO, et al. 2009.
Comprehensive mapping of long-range interactions reveals folding
principles of the human genome. Science 326: 289–293.
Mani RS, Chinnaiyan AM. 2010. Triggers for genomic rearrangements:
insights into genomic, cellular and environmental influences. Nat Rev
Genet 11: 819–829.
Meaburn KJ, Misteli T, Soutoglou E. 2007. Spatial genome organization in
the formation of chromosomal translocations. Semin Cancer Biol 17:
80–90.
Meister P, Taddei A, Gasser SM. 2006. In and out of the replication factory.
Cell 125: 1233–1235.
Mills RE, Walter K, Stewart C, Handsaker RE, Chen K, Alkan C, Abyzov A,
Yoon SC, Ye K, Cheetham RK, et al. 2011. Mapping copy number
variation by population-scale genome sequencing. Nature 470: 59–65.
Nik-Zainal S, Alexandrov LB, Wedge DC, Van Loo P, Greenman CD, Raine K,
Jones D, Hinton J, Marshall J, Stebbings LA, et al. 2012. Mutational
processes molding the genomes of 21 breast cancers. Cell 149: 979–993.
Roberts SA, Sterling J, Thompson C, Harris S, Mav D, Shah R, Klimczak LJ,
Kryukov GV, Malc E, Mieczkowski PA, et al. 2012. Clustered mutations in
yeast and in human cancers can arise from damaged long single-strand
DNA regions. Mol Cell 46: 424–435.
Ross AL, Sale JE. 2006. The catalytic activity of REV1 is employed during
immunoglobulin gene diversification in DT40. Mol Immunol 43: 1587–1594.
Rozen S, Skaletsky H. 2000. Primer3 on the WWW for general users and for
biologist programmers. Methods Mol Biol 132: 365–386.
Rubin AF, Green P. 2009. Mutation patterns in cancer genomes. Proc Natl
Acad Sci 106: 21766–21770.
Ryba T, Hiratani I, Lu J, Itoh M, Kulik M, Zhang J, Schulz TC, Robins AJ,
Dalton S, Gilbert DM. 2010. Evolutionarily conserved replication timing
profiles predict long-range chromatin interactions and distinguish
closely related cell types. Genome Res 20: 761–770.
Scholz FW, Stephens MA. 1987. K-sample Anderson-Darling tests. J Am Stat
Assoc 82: 918–924.
Smith TF, Waterman MS. 1981. Identification of common molecular
subsequences. J Mol Biol 147: 195–197.
Stephens P, Edkins S, Davies H, Greenman C, Cox C, Hunter C, Bignell G,
Teague J, Smith R, Stevens C, et al. 2005. A screen of the complete
protein kinase gene family identifies diverse patterns of somatic
mutations in human breast cancer. Nat Genet 37: 590–592.
Stephens PJ, McBride DJ, Lin ML, Varela I, Pleasance ED, Simpson JT,
Stebbings LA, Leroy C, Edkins S, Mudie LJ, et al. 2009. Complex
landscapes of somatic rearrangement in human breast cancer genomes.
Nature 462: 1005–1010.
Stephens PJ, Greenman CD, Fu B, Yang F, Bignell GR, Mudie LJ, Pleasance
ED, Lau KW, Beare D, Stebbings LA, et al. 2011. Massive genomic
rearrangement acquired in a single catastrophic event during cancer
development. Cell 144: 27–40.
Stransky N, Egloff AM, Tward AD, Kostic AD, Cibulskis K, Sivachenko A,
Kryukov GV, Lawrence M, Sougnez C, McKenna A, et al. 2011. The
mutational landscape of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.
Science 333: 1157–1160.
Tillier ER, Collins RA. 2000. Genome rearrangement by replication-directed
translocation. Nat Genet 26: 195–197.
Totoki Y, Tatsuno K, Yamamoto S, Arai Y, Hosoda F, Ishikawa S, Tsutsumi S,
Sonoda K, Totsuka H, Shirakihara T, et al. 2011. High-resolution
characterization of a hepatocellular carcinoma genome. Nat Genet 43:
464–469.
Wang J, Mullighan CG, Easton J, Roberts S, Heatley SL, Ma J, Rusch MC,
Chen K, Harris CC, Ding L, et al. 2011. CREST maps somatic structural
variation in cancer genomes with base-pair resolution. Nat Methods 8:
652–654.
Wang L, Lawrence MS, Wan Y, Stojanov P, Sougnez C, Stevenson K, Werner L,
Sivachenko A, DeLuca DS, Zhang L, et al. 2011. SF3B1 and other novel
cancer genes in chronic lymphocytic leukemia. N Engl J Med 365: 2497–
2506.
Yaffe E, Tanay A. 2011. Probabilistic modeling of Hi-C contact maps
eliminates systematic biases to characterize global chromosomal
architecture. Nat Genet 43: 1059–1065.
Zhu C, Mills KD, Ferguson DO, Lee C, Manis J, Fleming J, Gao Y, Morton CC,
Alt FW. 2002. Unrepaired DNA breaks in p53-deficient cells lead to
oncogenic gene amplification subsequent to translocations. Cell 109:
811–821.
Received April 16, 2012; accepted in revised form October 17, 2012.
Somatic rearrangements across cancer
Genome Research
235
www.genome.org
 
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
 on May 16, 2024 - Published by 
genome.cshlp.org
Downloaded from 

 
10.1101/gr.141382.112
Access the most recent version at doi:
2013 23: 228-235 originally published online November 2, 2012
Genome Res. 
  
Yotam Drier, Michael S. Lawrence, Scott L. Carter, et al. 
  hypermutability
with distinct patterns of DNA breakage and rearrangement-induced 
Somatic rearrangements across cancer reveal classes of samples
  
Material
Supplemental
  
 
http://genome.cshlp.org/content/suppl/2012/11/29/gr.141382.112.DC1
  
References
  
 
http://genome.cshlp.org/content/23/2/228.full.html#ref-list-1
This article cites 54 articles, 8 of which can be accessed free at:
  
Open Access
  
 Open Access option.
Genome Research
Freely available online through the 
  
License
Commons 
Creative
.
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/3.0/
as described at 
a Creative Commons License (Attribution-NonCommercial 3.0 Unported License), 
). After six months, it is available under
http://genome.cshlp.org/site/misc/terms.xhtml
first six months after the full-issue publication date (see 
This article is distributed exclusively by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press for the
Service
Email Alerting
  
 
click here.
top right corner of the article or 
Receive free email alerts when new articles cite this article - sign up in the box at the
 
https://genome.cshlp.org/subscriptions
go to: 
Genome Research 
To subscribe to 
© 2013, Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
 
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
 on May 16, 2024 - Published by 
genome.cshlp.org
Downloaded from 
