Genetic and Clonal Dissection
of Murine Small Cell Lung Carcinoma
Progression by Genome Sequencing
David G. McFadden,1,5 Thales Papagiannakopoulos,1,5 Amaro Taylor-Weiner,3,5 Chip Stewart,3,5 Scott L. Carter,3,5
Kristian Cibulskis,3 Arjun Bhutkar,1 Aaron McKenna,3 Alison Dooley,1 Amanda Vernon,1 Carrie Sougnez,3
Scott Malstrom,1 Megan Heimann,1 Jennifer Park,1 Frances Chen,1 Anna F. Farago,1 Talya Dayton,1 Erica Sheﬂer,3
Stacey Gabriel,3 Gad Getz,3,4,* and Tyler Jacks1,2,*
1Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research and Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge,
MA 02142, USA
2Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA
3Cancer Program, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA
4Cancer Center and Department of Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 02114, USA
5Co-ﬁrst author
*Correspondence: gadgetz@broadinstitute.org (G.G.), tjacks@mit.edu (T.J.)
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2014.02.031
SUMMARY
Small cell lung carcinoma (SCLC) is a highly lethal,
smoking-associated cancer with few known target-
able genetic alterations. Using genome sequencing,
we characterized the somatic evolution of a geneti-
cally engineered mouse model (GEMM) of SCLC
initiated by loss of Trp53 and Rb1. We identiﬁed
alterations in DNA copy number and complex
genomic rearrangements and demonstrated a low
somatic point mutation frequency in the absence of
tobacco mutagens. Alterations targeting the tumor
suppressor Pten occurred in the majority of murine
SCLC studied, and engineered Pten deletion acceler-
ated murine SCLC and abrogated loss of Chr19 in
Trp53; Rb1; Pten compound mutant tumors. Finally,
we found evidence for polyclonal and sequential
metastatic spread of murine SCLC by comparative
sequencing of families of related primary tumors
and metastases. We propose a temporal model of
SCLC tumorigenesis with implications for human
SCLC therapeutics and the nature of cancer-genome
evolution in GEMMs.
INTRODUCTION
Human
tumors
are
believed
to
arise
through
reiterated
Darwinian cycles of spontaneous mutation and selection (Now-
ell, 1976). By the time a tumor is clinically detected, individual
tumor cells harbor numerous acquired mutational events under
selection (‘‘drivers’’) and an even greater number of events offer-
ing no selective advantage (‘‘passengers’’). The identiﬁcation of
driver mutations in human cancers remains a major obstacle for
cancer genome sequencing efforts. Although several ap-
proaches have been recently described, the statistical power
of these approaches is critically dependent on large sample
numbers in part due to high-observed mutation frequencies,
particularly in mutagen-associated cancers (Lawrence et al.,
2013).
As an example of these challenges, two recent small-cell lung
carcinoma (SCLC)-sequencing studies identiﬁed distinct novel
putative driver alterations (Peifer et al., 2012; Rudin et al.,
2012). Whether this reﬂects true biological differences in the
tumor cohorts or differences in analytical methods is unknown.
A limitation of these and many human cancer-genome charac-
terization studies to date is the lack of rigorous in vivo functional
validation. Studies that include functional data largely rely upon
cultured cells, which lack many hallmark features of naturally
arising tumors (Hanahan and Weinberg, 2011).
SCLC is nearly always associated with extended tobacco use
and has lagged behind other solid tumors with respect to identi-
ﬁcation of targetable driver mutations (Califano et al., 2012;
Jackman and Johnson, 2005). In addition, patients usually
present with highly advanced, metastatic disease. Although
there is often a signiﬁcant response to systemic chemotherapy,
the disease invariably relapses and the median 5-year overall
survival is less than 5%. Moreover, surgical resection is rarely
performed, and the consequent lack of available SCLC tissue
is a signiﬁcant barrier to molecular studies. Human SCLC harbor
mutations in TP53 and RB1 at very high frequency; therefore,
a mouse model of SCLC was generated by lung-speciﬁc
compound deletion of Trp53 and Rb1 (hereafter referred to as
‘‘PR mSCLC’’ for p53, Rb1 mutant murine SCLC; Meuwissen
et al., 2003). In the absence of tobacco-associated mutagens,
these animals develop SCLC that progresses from small neuro-
endocrine bodies (NEBs) and recapitulates many features of the
human disease, including frequent distant metastases to sites
commonly seeded by human SCLC.
We hypothesized that several features of the PR mSCLC
model were well-suited for a comparative cancer genome
sequencing study. First, unlike many models, mSCLC is initiated
by engineered deletion of two tumor suppressors (Rb and p53).
1298
Cell 156, 1298–1311, March 13, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc.

In addition, somatic tumor-genome evolution, including the
conserved oncogenic DNA copy number ampliﬁcations of
Mycl1 and Nﬁb, has been demonstrated during tumor progres-
sion in mSCLC (Calbo´ et al., 2005; Dooley et al., 2011). The
long latency (12–14 months) and high frequency of metastases
in this model also mirrors the progression of most adult-onset
human cancers that are believed to evolve over many years
(Jones et al., 2008). We also predicted that the absence of
tobacco mutagens would reduce the background mutation
frequency and improve statistical power to detect recurrent
driver mutations. Here, we characterize a panel of PR mSCLC
primary and metastatic tumors at single-nucleotide resolution
using exome and genome sequencing in order to elucidate
mechanisms of tumor progression and identify conserved ac-
quired somatic drivers of SCLC.
RESULTS
Murine SCLCs Harbor Complex Genomes
We generated a PR mSCLC tissue bank consisting of primary
tumors
and
metastases
as
previously
described
(Dooley
et al., 2011; Table S1A available online). Exome sequencing
was performed on 27 SCLC primary tumors and metastases
isolated from six individual animals with matched control DNA
isolated from tail clippings (total of 33 exomes). Fourteen tu-
mors and paired control DNA also underwent whole-genome
sequencing (WGS; total 18). Raw data were processed through
a mouse-speciﬁc analysis pipeline (Extended Experimental
Procedures).
Considering the role of previously characterized acquired DNA
copy number alterations in this model, we ﬁrst identiﬁed recur-
rent somatic DNA copy number alterations in primary mSCLC
tumors (Extended Experimental Procedures; Tables S1B–S1D;
Beroukhim et al., 2007; Mermel et al., 2011). As shown in
Figures 1A–1C, the most frequent alterations in somatic DNA
copy number were whole chromosomal alterations, including
losses of Chr19 (9 of 17 primary tumors; GISTIC q value: <1 3
1015), followed by gain of Chr4 (6/17 primary tumors; GISTIC
q value: <1 3 1015). mSCLC tumors also harbored recurrent
loss of Chr8, Chr12, Chr14, and Chr16 (GISTIC q value: 8.34 3
107; <1 3 1015, <1 3 1015, and 8.34 3 107, respectively)
and gain of Chr16 (q value 1.6 3 106). In all cases, whole chro-
mosome losses were hemizygous.
We also detected focal Chr4 ampliﬁcations that harbored
well-established oncogenes previously described in PR mSCLC,
including Mycl1 (8/17 tumors; GISTIC q value: 3.7 3 107) and
Nﬁb (4/17 tumors; GISTIC q value 1.0 3 104; Figure 1C; Calbo´
et al., 2005; Dooley et al., 2011). We identiﬁed a recurrent focal
deletion encompassing Mir200a/Mir200b and the hairy enhancer
of split (Hes2, Hes3, and Hes5) family of transcriptional effectors
of the Notch signaling pathway (q value 2.39 3 105). Whether
these ampliﬁed and deleted regions drive progression of mSCLC
remains to be tested, but analysis with GISTIC demonstrates
that these alterations occurred more frequently than expected
by chance, suggesting these events provide selective advantage
during tumor progression.
We identiﬁed genomic rearrangements in 14 mSCLC tumors
by WGS (Table S1E; Extended Experimental Procedures). No
speciﬁc classes of rearrangements were enriched in these sam-
ples, nor were recurrent rearrangements identiﬁed in mSCLC
(Figure S1A). However, the vast majority of events occurred on
Chr4 (Figure S1B). We investigated the process underlying the
complex ampliﬁcations on Chr4 by reconstruction of individual
Chr4 maps (Figure S1C). This suggested that serial rearrange-
ment cycles, rather than a single event (i.e., chromothripsis),
led to generation of the Chr4 oncogenic ampliﬁcations in a punc-
tuated manner (Baca et al., 2013; Korbel and Campbell, 2013).
Interestingly, the tumor-suppressor loci Cdkn2a and Cdkn2b
are located between Nﬁb and Mycl1 on Chr4 and therefore
may pose a selective pressure against whole chromosomal
gain or chromothripsis of Chr4 as a mechanism to amplify
Mycl1 and Nﬁb function in this setting. PCR-based validation
of a subset of putative rearrangements suggested a high degree
of conﬁdence in rearrangement calls (Figure S1D; Experimental
Procedures). We detected rearrangements with putative func-
tion, including a focal deletion of Magi2, an upstream component
of the phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN)/phosphatidyli-
nositol 3-kinase (PI3K) signaling network (Wu et al., 2000;
Zmajkovicova et al., 2013). We also noted intrachromosomal
rearrangements generating in-frame fusions of Abl1 kinase
(Abl1-Nup214) and transcriptional regulators Cited4 (Cited4-
Asap3 and 9030409GRik-Cited4; Figure S1E).
We next identiﬁed point mutations in the exonic sequences
of 27 primary tumor and metastasis using muTect (Cibulskis
et al., 2013). Exome sequencing revealed a mean of 0.91 pro-
tein-altering point mutations per Mb sequenced, or 27.9 pro-
tein-altering mutations per tumor (Figure S2A; Table S1F). Given
the general lack of experience with these methods in model
organisms, we performed two independent validation exercises
that suggested these methods were accurate and estimates of
mutation frequencies were valid (see Extended Experimental
Procedures; Table S1G; Figure S2B).
To begin cross-species analysis of human cancer and murine
SCLC genomes, we ﬁrst compared the overall frequencies of
DNA copy number alterations, point mutations, and rearrange-
ments observed in mSCLC to several human tumor types
(Extended Experimental Procedures). Interestingly, mSCLCs
exhibited a comparable frequency of genomic rearrangements
and copy number alterations compared to human cancers but
harbored a signiﬁcantly lower number of point mutations (Fig-
ures 1D–1F). Although the mechanisms underlying these obser-
vations remain unclear, the low point mutation frequency is likely
in part a result of the absence of tobacco-associated mutagens.
The high frequency of rearrangements, including complex punc-
tuated rearrangements of Chr4, may be in part a reﬂection of p53
loss (Rausch et al., 2012). In order to speciﬁcally search for
shared driver genes in SCLC, we also compared recurrently
ampliﬁed or deleted regions within mSCLC genomes to available
data from human SCLC genome-sequencing studies (Table
S1H; Extended Experimental Procedures; Peifer et al., 2012;
Rudin et al., 2012). Regions within Chr4 ampliﬁcation and
Chr14 loss in mSCLC were conserved in human SCLC. The
region of recurrent ampliﬁcation on Chr4 encompassing Mycl1
corresponded to a region of ampliﬁcation on Chr1 in human
SCLC harboring MYCL1. In addition, a set of genes frequently
deleted within the Chr3p region in human SCLC, including the
Cell 156, 1298–1311, March 13, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc.
1299

putative tumor suppressor FHIT, was syntenic to murine Chr14,
which was subject to recurrent hemizygous loss (Wistuba et al.,
2001).
The mechanisms that give rise to point mutations in this model
are not the focus of this work; however, we observed a note-
worthy mutation signature in mSCLC that would bear further
investigation (Figures S2C and S2D). This signature was also
dominant in the set of validated mutations (Extended Experi-
mental Procedures). Interestingly, the signature was not de-
tected in a KrasG12D; p53-null driven mouse model of lung
adenocarcinoma (data not shown; D.G.M, G.G., and T.J., un-
published data). This suggested the mSCLC signature is unique
to this model and not a universal feature of genetically engi-
neered models or p53-null murine cancer cells. These mutations
did not occur preferentially in regions of DNA copy number
alteration or near rearrangement breakpoints (data not shown),
and therefore, we suggest that this mutational signature is the
product of an as yet unknown mechanism.
Figure 1. Genome Remodeling during mSCLC Progression
(A) Global DNA copy number alterations (CNAs) shown for mSCLC primary tumors. Blue represents copy loss; red represents copy gain. Individual tumors shown
horizontally, chromosomes depicted on vertical axis.
(B) GISTIC analysis of recurrent whole-chromosome CNAs in mSCLC identiﬁes recurrent loss of Chr19, Chr12, Chr14, and Chr16 and recurrent gain of Chr4.
(C) GISTIC analysis of recurrent focal CNAs identiﬁes six recurrent ampliﬁcation peaks on Chr4 and a single area of recurrent copy number loss on Chr4. Genes of
interest are listed next to focal gains and losses, and the number of genes in the peak of the CNA is shown in parentheses.
(D) Comparison between mSCLC and human cancers with respect to the fraction of the genome altered by CNAs.
(E) Comparison of mSCLC and human cancers with respect to the number of rearrangements per tumor.
(F) mSCLCs exhibit a lower point mutation frequency compared to human cancers.
(G) Circos diagrams depicting whole-genome sequencing of mSCLC. Shared rearrangements between primary tumors and metastases identify lineage
relationships. Outer band represents metaphase banding pattern; inner track shows DNA copy number alterations. Intrachromosomal rearrangements are shown
as blue (shared between multiple tumors) or green (unique); interchromosomal events are shown as red lines (shared between multiple tumors) or purple (unique).
See also Figure S1 and Table S1. Error bars (D–F) represent mean and SD.
1300
Cell 156, 1298–1311, March 13, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc.

mSCLCs Acquire Recurrent Alterations in the Pten
Tumor Suppressor Pathway
We identiﬁed two statistically signiﬁcant recurrently mutated
genes using MutSig, Pten and Olfr811 (Figure 2A; Table S1I;
Extended Experimental Procedures). Three independent point
mutations in Pten were identiﬁed and validated (Figures S2E
and S2F). Review of individual Pten mutations provided strong
evidence for functional impact of these mutations: the T131P
mutation corresponds to a hot spot mutation site within the
catalytic core of the phosphatase domain, and the T26P and
R267-splice mutations are documented germline events in
Cowden’s syndrome (Forbes et al., 2011; Pilarski et al., 2011;
Figure 2. mSCLCs Acquire Recurrent Pten Alterations
(A) CoMut plot showing the individual mSCLC tumors on the x axis and mutation information on the y axes. Two genes are considered statistically signiﬁcantly
mutated: Pten and Olfr811. Left-sided histogram shows percent of samples with a mutation in the given gene in the right side of plot. Average allelic fraction of
mutations inindividualtumorsshownbelowmutationplot,andChr19copystatus shownatbottomofdiagram.Numberofmutations/sampleshown ontophistogram.
(B) Pten immunohistochemistry (IHC) showing positive Pten staining in early premalignant neuroendocrine bodies (NEBs).
(C) Pten IHC depicting a Pten-negative tumor.
(D and E) Pten (D) and phospho-AKT(S473) (E) mutually exclusive IHC staining in the same mSCLC tumor.
See also Figure S2 and Table S1.
Cell 156, 1298–1311, March 13, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc.
1301

Tsou et al., 1998). We also identiﬁed recurrent nonsynonymous
mutations in genes encoding other Pten signaling components:
Magi1, a scaffolding protein involved in shuttling Pten to the
plasma membrane; Eef2k, a downstream PI3K effector involved
in the regulation of translation elongation; and Ikbkb, a gene
product linking nuclear factor kB to PI3K signaling (Ha¨ cker and
Karin, 2006; Kotelevets et al., 2005; Zmajkovicova et al., 2013).
Each of these genes was mutated in two clonally independent
tumors. This suggests that disruption of Pten signaling at multi-
ple points in the pathway may promote tumor progression in
mSCLC. Indeed, ingenuity pathway analysis of all protein-
altering point mutations identiﬁed in mSCLC revealed enrich-
ment of the PI3K/PTEN networks (Table S1J). In addition,
PTEN alterations have been reported in human SCLC, further
supporting a conserved tumor-suppressive role (Dacic et al.,
2002; Forgacs et al., 1998; Yokomizo et al., 1998).
In addition to alterations in Pten signaling, we detected
recurrent mutations in the semaphorin (Sema5b, Sema3c, and
Sema4f) and ephrin (Epha5 and Epha7) gene families, which
regulate cellular migration during embryonic development. Inter-
estingly, axonal guidance pathways have been implicated as
drivers in pancreatic cancer by recent cross-species sequencing
and transposon-based screens in pancreatic cancer (Biankin
et al., 2012).
We also compared genes mutated in mSCLC to two recent
human-SCLC-sequencing reports (Peifer et al., 2012; Rudin
et al., 2012). Because the mutational burden in human SCLC
was high, we analyzed genes mutated in mSCLC relative to the
published signiﬁcantly mutated, hot spot, and clustered genes
from both studies (Table S1K). Several genes were mutated in
both mSCLC and human SCLC, including PTEN and EPHA7.
However, whether this is the product of the high mutation fre-
quency observed in human SCLC or reﬂects a conserved func-
tional role for shared events remains to be determined. Of
note, only one gene besides TP53 and RB1, TMEM132D, was
reported as signiﬁcantly mutated by both human studies. This
highlights the challenges associated with genomic analysis of
highly mutated human cancer genomes.
The genomic location of Pten, Chr19 28.14cM, also raised the
possibility that Chr19 loss, the most frequent observed alteration
in DNA copy number in mSCLC, may be driven primarily by
impairment of Pten function. All tumors harboring Pten point
mutations also exhibited evidence for loss of Chr19, suggesting
that complete loss of Pten function may be advantageous and
occur via multiple mechanisms in mSCLC.
To further deﬁne the frequency and timing of Pten loss in
mSCLC, we examined Pten expression by immunohistochem-
istry (IHC) in early neuroendocrine bodies and in advanced
tumors (Figures 2B–2D). Qualitative analysis of Pten staining
revealed that the majority of high-grade mSCLCs exhibit com-
plete loss of Pten as compared to precursor neuroendocrine
bodies (Figure S2G), supporting the notion that Pten loss may
facilitate tumor outgrowth. We also observed several mSCLC
tumors with a mixed Pten status (Figure 2D). Although PI3K
independent functions of Pten have been demonstrated, a hall-
mark of Pten loss is activation of the canonical PI3K/AKT
signaling pathway. Therefore, we assessed Pten status and
PI3K signaling by IHC for Pten and phospho-Akt (pAktS473).
Pten-negative areas showed a reciprocal increase in pAkt stain-
ing by IHC (Figures 2D and 2E), implicating canonical PI3K
signaling as a major output of Pten loss during mSCLC progres-
sion. In addition, a tumor harboring an inactivating Pten point
mutation (T131P), and another sample with a Magi2 deletion,
did not show loss of Pten IHC staining but exhibited increased
pAkt staining (data not shown).
To test whether mutations in upstream signaling components
impact canonical PI3K signaling in SCLC, we depleted Magi1
using small hairpin RNAs (shRNAs) in mSCLC cell lines. Consis-
tent with this model, Magi1 knockdown resulted in increased
pAkt signaling uniquely in cells with wild-type Pten status (Fig-
ure S3A). We detected modestly diminished cellular growth in
response to Magi knockdown in mSCLC cells, independent of
Pten status, suggesting that Magi1 was required for PI3K-
independent functions in mSCLC cells, consistent with prior
studies (Wegmann et al., 2004).
Pten Deletion in mSCLC Accelerates Tumorigenesis
In order to deﬁne the role of Pten loss in mSCLC, we crossed a
cre-regulated, conditional Pten allele into the PR mSCLC model
(hereafter referred to as PRPt for p53, Rb1 and Pten; Lesche
et al., 2002). To assess tumor growth kinetics in living animals,
a cohort of PRPt animals also harbored a cre-activated lucif-
erase reporter allele. We initiated tumors in PRPt (Trp53FL/FL;
Rb1FL/FL; PtenFL/FL), PRPt/+ (Trp53FL/FL; Rb1FL/FL; PtenFL/+),
and PR (Trp53FL/FL; Rb1FL/FL; Pten+/+) animals by intratracheal
administration of adenovirus expressing cre recombinase under
the control of the neuroendocrine-speciﬁc CGRP promoter in
order to selectively delete Rb1, Trp53, and Pten in pulmonary
neuroendocrine cells (Sutherland et al., 2011). Measurement of
in vivo luciferase activity at 4, 5, and 6 months posttumor induc-
tion revealed acceleration of tumor growth in PRPt versus PR
animals (Figures 3A and 3B).
We also assessed tumor burden in cohorts of PR, PRPt/+,
and PRPt animals 5 months following tumor induction using
small-animal MRI. We detected signiﬁcantly greater tumor
volume in PRPt animals (Figures 3C and 3D). Furthermore,
we observed a signiﬁcant reduction in mSCLC tumor latency
and signiﬁcantly reduced overall survival in PRPt (6.3 months)
and PRPt/+ (8.3 months) compared to PR animals (17.5 months;
Figure 3E). We conﬁrmed the in vivo imaging results in cohorts
of PR, PRPt/+, and PRPt animals at 5 months postinduction
using quantitative histology, which showed a striking difference
in tumor burden (Figure 3F). To ensure a change in tumor
spectrum did not underlie the acceleration of tumor progression
in PRPt animals, we performed histological analysis of tumor-
bearing lung sections. The majority of the tumors identiﬁed
displayed neuroendocrine features and stained positive for
the neuroendocrine marker CGRP, consistent with a role for
Pten loss as a driver of SCLC progression (Figures S3B, S3E,
and S3H).
The state of PI3K signaling was assessed using phospho-
speciﬁc IHC for Akt. High levels of pAkt were present in PRPt
tumors at 6 months posttumor induction (Figures S3D and
S3G). Pten loss and activated Akt signaling are known to pro-
mote proliferation and oppose apoptosis. Therefore, we assayed
apoptosis and proliferation by IHC. We detected a signiﬁcant
1302
Cell 156, 1298–1311, March 13, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc.

increase in phospho-histone H3, a mitotic marker, in the PRPt
as compared to PR tumors 6 months after tumor initiation (Fig-
ure S3I). Conversely, we observed a decrease in the levels of
cleaved caspase-3, a marker of apoptosis, in Pten-null tumors
(Figure S3J). These data support the tumor-suppressive role of
Pten in mSCLC and provide evidence that loss of Pten can drive
tumor progression, in part through increased proliferation and
diminished apoptosis.
Figure 3. Pten Deletion Accelerates mSCLC Progression
(A) Representative bright ﬁeld/luminescence images.
(B) Quantitation of luminescence (photon ﬂux) of PR and PRPt animals. Relative photon ﬂux calculated by normalizing all time points per animal to initial
measurements at 4 months postinfection.
(C) Representative axial MRI sections of PR and PRPt animals at 5 months postinfection.
(D) MRI tumor volume measurements (mm3).
(E) Overall survival of SCLC cohorts.
(F) Relative tumor burden determined by quantitative hematoxylin and eosin staining microscopy. **p < 0.01.
(B, D, and F) Mean and SEM shown by error bars. See also Figure S3 and Table S1.
Cell 156, 1298–1311, March 13, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc.
1303

Combinations of Engineered Events Alter the Path of
mSCLC Genomic Evolution
Detection of recurrent Pten point mutations and the in vivo func-
tional studies provide evidence that Pten loss is a crucial event
during mSCLC tumor progression. It is therefore reasonable to
hypothesize that Pten mutation is the driving force behind
Chr19 loss in PR mSCLC. To test this notion, we utilized PRPt
triple-mutant mSCLC to characterize tumor-genome evolution
in the context of Pten loss at the time of tumor initiation. We
performed low-read-depth whole-genome sequencing of 11
PRPt (nine primary tumors and two metastases) and two
PRPt/+ mSCLC tumors to characterize acquired DNA copy
number alterations. These tumors were of similar size and histo-
logic grade to PR tumors used in our initial analyses. Consistent
with the hypothesis that selective advantage of Pten impairment
underlies loss of Chr19 in this model, all PRPt mSCLC exhibited a
DNA copy number of two for Chr19 (Figures 4A and 4B; Table
S1L). Therefore, deletion of a single exon of Pten provided the
selective advantage for loss of an entire chromosome in this
model. Interestingly, two PRPt/+ tumors exhibited hemizygous
loss of Chr19, and review of the sequencing reads demonstrated
that the mutant chromosome 19 was retained, suggesting addi-
tional selective advantage of complete Pten loss (Figure 4C).
Despite the decreased tumor latency and absence of Chr19
loss in the PRPt mSCLC tumors, we detected recurrent focal
ampliﬁcations on Chr4 in these samples (Figure 4B; Table
S1M). Although GISTIC analysis did not show Mycl1 within the
predicted ampliﬁcation peak, our sequencing read depth was
designed to detect whole-chromosome gains and losses rather
than focal alterations. Therefore, we used quantitative PCR
to assess Mycl1 ampliﬁcation in these samples. Mycl1 copy
number was ampliﬁed in these tumors, suggesting an important
role for Mycl1 ampliﬁcation during the initial outgrowth of
mSCLC (Figure S4).
Intratumoral Clonal Heterogeneity in mSCLC
We established tumor lineage relationships between primary
tumors and metastases from individual mice by identiﬁca-
tion of shared DNA rearrangements and point mutations
(example, Figure 1G). Using this approach, we identiﬁed related
Figure 4. Pten Deletion Alters Genome Evolution in mSCLC
(A) CNA heatmap for PRPt mSCLC tumors analyzed by SegSeq.
(B) GISTIC results for recurrent CNAs. Note the absence of Chr19 deletion and presence of Chr4 focal ampliﬁcation.
(C) Chr19 copy number map for all primary tumors analyzed. Genotype is listed to the right. Analysis method (CapSeg or SegSeq) listed to the left.
See also Figure S4 and Table S1.
1304
Cell 156, 1298–1311, March 13, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc.

primary-metastasis pairs from six animals, including three tumor
families from which we sequenced multiple metastatic lesions
(Table S1N). Although shared somatic mutations can identify
basic lineage relationships between tumors, more sophisticated
methods are required to reconstruct the clonal architecture of tu-
mor progression. We ﬁrst examined the allelic fraction of somatic
mutations in mSCLC tumors. The observed distribution of allelic
fractions for all somatic mutations observed in primary tumors
revealed an abundance of mutations with low allelic fraction.
However, metastases exhibited a greater proportion of muta-
tions with high allelic fraction, consistent with a clonal bottleneck
during metastatic seeding (Figures S5A and S5B).
The allelic fraction of a mutation depends on tumor purity,
local DNA copy number, and the fraction of cells in a tumor
that harbor the mutation. Therefore, in order to systematically
characterize the clonal structure of PR mSCLC tumors, we
used ABSOLUTE, a method that utilizes the copy number of
DNA in the vicinity of a mutation and tumor purity to estimate
the fraction of cancer cells harboring a given mutation, called
the cancer cell fraction (CCF) (Carter et al., 2012; Landau
et al., 2013). ABSOLUTE analysis conﬁrmed the presence of
clonal heterogeneity in all mSCLC tumors, with a range of two
to ﬁve subclones within individual tumors (Tables S1O–S1Q).
We compared the CCF for individual mutations between pri-
mary tumors and metastases using two-dimensional plots in
order to deﬁne the clonal structure of mSCLC (Figure 5). Clonal
lineages were identiﬁed by clustering mutations exhibiting
shared CCF (Landau et al., 2013). As a tumor subclone colo-
nizes metastatic sites, it passes through population bottlenecks
in which the preexisting mutations are enriched and additional
mutations are subsequently acquired. We denote clonal line-
ages by a common nomenclature (for example, clone 1a is a
descendent of clone 1 and clone 1b is a descendent of clone
1a, whereas clone 2 is a related, but independent, sibling of
clone 1). The number of mutations delineating each clonal
transition is shown in Figure 5, and all mutations in the tumor
families detailed below are annotated with the CCF and
subclone assignment in Tables S1O–S1Q.
Parallel Seeding of Multiple Liver Metastases in mSCLC
From animal 3588, we sequenced three primary tumors and
two
independent
liver
metastases
(Figures
5A–5E;
Table
S1O). Both liver metastases (3588-C1 and 3588-M1) shared
17 clonal mutations with one primary tumor, 3588-T1, demon-
strating that these arose from a single primary tumor. 3588-T1
harbored two independent subclones existing at approximately
0.2 CCF (clone 1, purple) and 0.25 CCF (clone 2, blue; see Fig-
ures 5B–5D). Interestingly, both liver metastases originated
from closely related subclones (clone 1a-M1 and clone 1a-
C1) that were descended from a common ancestor (clone
1a). Clone 1a was a descendent of clone 1, as demonstrated
by the enrichment of the CCF of clone 1 mutations in both
descendent metastases (Figures 5B and 5D, purple clusters).
We could not discriminate if clone 1a was present in the pri-
mary tumor outside of the sampled region or below the level
of detection or whether it ﬁrst seeded another site prior to
founding the liver metastases. Each metastatic lesion also
continued to evolve during outgrowth as evidenced by acquisi-
tion of subclonal mutations (clone 1a-M1-a, green, and clone
1a-C1-a, red; Figures 5B, 5D, and 5E).
Polyclonal Seeding of Local Lymph Node Metastases in
mSCLC
We sequenced ﬁve primary tumors, one thoracic lymph node
metastasis, and one liver metastasis from animal 3151. Again,
in this case, both metastases shared acquired clonal mutations
with one primary tumor, conﬁrming their shared origin (light
gray clusters, Figures 5G and 5I; Table S1P). Comparison of
the primary tumor (3151-T1) and lymph node metastasis (3151-
N1) revealed a large cluster of mutations (green-light purple
central cluster, Figure 5G) present at subclonal CCF in both the
primary tumor and metastasis. A single-cell-origin model would
require mutations to become clonal in a descendent metastasis.
Therefore, these data were inconsistent with monoclonal origin
of the lymph node metastasis (Figures 5F–5J). Comparison of
the lymph node and liver metastases (3151-M1) revealed that
only a subset of mutations in this cluster was shared with the liver
metastasis (Figures 5H and 5I; clone 1 mutations). In addition,
mutations in clone 1a from the nodal metastasis (3151-N1)
were enriched to a clonal CCF (1.0) in the distant liver metastasis
(Figure 5I). We therefore concluded that two related primary
tumor subclones (clone 1, light purple, and clone 2, green; Fig-
ure 5G) seeded the lymph node metastasis and gave rise to
clones 1a and 2a (Figure 5G). However, only one of these clones
spread to the liver (clone 1b, a direct descendent of clone 1a
from the lymph node metastasis; Figure 5J). Clone 1b was the
founding clone of the liver metastasis and was a recent descen-
dent of clone 1a, as shown by the enrichment of clone 1a CCF
(0.5 to 1.0) in the distant liver metastasis (3151-M1; Figure 5I).
We cannot formally exclude the possibility that two highly related
clone 1 cells spread directly from the primary tumor to both the
lymph node and liver metastasis. However, in this scenario, we
would not have expected all clone 1a mutations to be shared
with the liver metastasis, as we observed. Therefore, the most
parsimonious explanation for the observed data is that two pri-
mary tumor subclones ﬁrst seeded the nodal metastasis and
that clone 1a further evolved into clone 1b and founded a tertiary
liver metastasis.
Two primary tumors and one lymph node metastasis were
sequenced from animal 984. Shared somatic mutations demon-
strated that primary tumor 984-T3 founded the lymph node
metastasis 984-M1 (Table S1Q). Analysis of this relationship
using ABSOLUTE revealed that clone 1 (dark gray, Figures 5K
and 5L) was present at subclonal CCF in both the primary tumor
and metastasis. This pattern is also inconsistent with mono-
clonal origin of the nodal metastasis and indicated that multiple
primary tumor (984-T3) subclones (clone 1, dark gray, and clone
2, red) spread to the local draining lymph node. Although clone 2
mutations were not detected in the primary tumor, the presence
of shared clonal mutations between 984-T3 and 984-M1 (light
gray cluster, Figure 5L) conﬁrmed that both subclones within
the local lymph node arose from a single primary tumor
(984-T3; Figure 5M). In each of these analyses, although we iden-
tiﬁed speciﬁc mutations present within individual subclones, our
data did not address whether individual mutations acted as
drivers or passengers.
Cell 156, 1298–1311, March 13, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc.
1305

(legend on next page)
1306
Cell 156, 1298–1311, March 13, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc.

DISCUSSION
Comparative Genomics to Identify Driver Genes in
Cancer
A longstanding goal of cancer genetics has been to exploit the
evolutionary conservation of the major tumor-suppressive and
proto-oncogenic cellular pathways between humans and mice
for biological discovery and preclinical modeling. Recently, this
has included analysis of acquired mutations in the genomes of
mouse cancer models. For example, focused DNA sequencing
of known proto-oncogenes in genetically engineered mouse
models initiated by ‘‘weak’’ cancer initiators has identiﬁed
somatically acquired activating mutations in Hras and Notch1
(O’Neil et al., 2006; Podsypanina et al., 2004). In addition,
small-scale exome and genome sequencing of murine models
of leukemia and breast cancers has identiﬁed conserved
somatic Jak1 and Trp53 mutations (Wartman et al., 2011; Yuan
et al., 2012).
The present study is to our knowledge the most complete
description of the somatic genome of a genetically engineered
mouse cancer model to date and also quantitatively assesses
intratumoral clonal heterogeneity and clonal evolution during
metastatic colonization. In the absence of tobacco mutagens,
we detected relatively few somatic point mutations compared
to human SCLC and mutagen-induced murine tumors (Matsush-
ita et al., 2012). The reduced mutational ‘‘noise’’ facilitated iden-
tiﬁcation of Pten loss as an important driver of tumor progression
in mSCLC. We detected recurrent somatic alterations targeting
Pten, including point mutations previously described in human
cancer and Cowden syndrome. In addition, we detected ac-
quired point mutations in other components of the PTEN/PI3K
pathway, including Magi1, Eef2k, Ikbkb, Insr, and Bcar1. The
majority of PR mSCLC tumors harbor a mutation in this pathway
and/or Chr19 loss. We also provide a functional validation of the
role of Pten by compound deletion of Pten in the autochthonous
mSCLC model. These results are consistent with a prior publica-
tion, suggesting engineered Pten loss accelerates early tumori-
genesis in a similar SCLC model (Song et al., 2012), and we
additionally characterize the effect of Pten deletion at all stages
of SCLC progression, including a dramatic decrease in survival
of PRPt animals.
Recent sequencing of human SCLC identiﬁed multiple
mutations in the PTEN/PI3K pathway, including PTEN, PIK3CB,
PIK3R3, MAGI1, and MAGI2 mutations. Although PTEN was not
identiﬁed as a recurrent target of deletion in SCLC, Chr10 copy
number loss encompassing PTEN was evident in one study (Pei-
fer et al., 2012). In addition, prior studies have demonstrated
PTEN alterations in approximately 20% of SCLC (Dacic et al.,
2002; Forgacs et al., 1998; Yokomizo et al., 1998). Therefore,
we suggest that PR mSCLC models a subclass of human
SCLC harboring alterations in the PTEN pathway.
Our data support a model in which Pten acts primarily as a
classical, rather than haploinsufﬁcient, tumor suppressor in
mSCLC. First, Pten protein expression was lost completely in
the majority of high-grade SCLC. In addition, all Pten point
mutations occurred in tumors with copy number loss at Chr19,
suggesting that Pten function was completely abrogated in these
cells. Finally, PRPt/+ animals showed evidence for loss of the
wild-type (WT) Pten allele, suggesting additional selective
advantage of complete Pten loss.
Single Locus Control of Chromosomal Alterations in
Cancer
Whole-chromosome gains and losses are frequently observed
in human cancers, yet it remains unclear whether the selective
advantage for these events results from one or multiple loci.
Several studies in mouse models have suggested that multiple
loci confer selective advantage for whole chromosome gain
and loss. For example, Kras-LA2 animals developed sponta-
neous lung adenomas, and these tumors frequently exhibited
whole-chromosome gains of the LA2-bearing mutant Chr6,
whereas
focal
Kras-LA2
ampliﬁcations
were
uncommon
(Sweet-Cordero et al., 2006; To et al., 2011). This led to the spec-
ulation that additional oncogenic Chr6 loci are under selection,
including other components of Mapk signaling (To et al., 2011).
In addition, prior studies of radiation-induced lymphomas from
Trp53+/ animals identiﬁed frequent loss of heterozygosity
(LOH) at Chr19 and focal deletions involving Pten (Mao et al.,
2003). Interestingly, whole-chromosome loss of Chr19 was
also noted in Pten+/ and Pten+/; Trp53+/ lymphomas
and was interpreted as evidence for the existence of additional
tumor-suppressor loci.
The data presented in this study implicate a single gene,
Pten, at the driving force behind loss of Chr19 in mSCLC. Of
note, Mao et al. (2004) showed frequent whole-chromosome
loss of Chr3 in radiation-induced lymphomas in Trp53+/
mice and identiﬁed Fbxw7 as a candidate tumor suppressor
in a small focal deletion. Heterozygous loss of Fbxw7 acceler-
ated tumorigenesis and abrogated Fbxw7 LOH, which was
inferred to reﬂect maintenance of the entire chromosome. How-
ever, these studies restricted LOH analysis to the Fbxw7 locus.
The data presented here extend the concept that a selective
advantage for impairment of a single locus can drive loss of
an entire chromosome and deﬁnitively demonstrate retention
of Chr19 in PRPt mSCLC using whole-genome methods. The
fact that no PRPt tumor analyzed exhibited DNA copy number
Figure 5. Clonal Evolution of mSCLC during Metastatic Spread
Each tier (A–E, F–J, and K–M) shows ABSOLUTE analysis of related primary and metastatic tumors in an individual animal. Left column of plots (A), (C), (F), (H), and
(K) shows unclustered CCF results for individual mutations in tumor pairs. Each cloud represents the 95% conﬁdence interval of the predicted CCF for each
mutation. Middle plots (B, D, G, I, and L) show the 95% conﬁdence intervals following a Bayesian clustering procedure that groups mutations into predicted
subclones. Clonal models based on ABSOLUTE results are shown in (E), (J), and (M). Dashed lines represent assumed transitions that are not directly observed in
the data. In all panels, cloud color denotes membership in corresponding node (clone) in the model diagram. (A–D) CCF results demonstrating a single subclone
(purple) from the primary tumor seeded two independent liver metastases. (F and G) shows multiple subclones from the primary tumor (clone 1 and clone 2)
seeding a lymph node metastasis. Clone 1b (purple), a descendent of clone 1a, seeded a tertiary liver metastasis from the lymph node (H and I). (K and L) CCF
results showing polyclonal seeding of a lymph node met (gray, clone 1a, and red, clone 2).
See also Figure S5 and Table S1.
Cell 156, 1298–1311, March 13, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc.
1307

loss of Chr19 is a powerful demonstration that loss of the Pten
tumor suppressor is the driving selective mechanism behind
loss of Chr19 in PR mSCLC.
Patterns of Clonal Progression in mSCLC
The description of clonal evolution between primary tumors
and metastases in solid human malignancies has been achieved
primarily by sequencing several distinct tumor regions (Campbell
et al., 2010; Gerlinger et al., 2012; Yachida et al., 2010). However,
in contrast to most human biopsies, which sample only a small
part of a tumor, we utilized approximately 50% of the individual
mSCLC tumor mass for nucleic acid preparation. Thus, a large
fraction of tumor sampling coupled with a deep sequencing
coverage (approximately 1003) may have helped elucidate the
patterns of clonal evolution between primary tumors and metas-
tases in the mSCLC model. We also capitalized on the high fre-
quency of macroscopic metastases in the mSCLC model and
our ability to harvest these diverse sites of disease at animal
necropsy. We believe our ﬁnding of spread of multiple primary
tumor subclones to a local lymph node metastasis is un-
precedented and the ﬁrst demonstration of polyclonal seeding
of metastases using deep sequencing. Considering the role of
the metastatic niche in mediating treatment resistance (Gilbert
and Hemann, 2010), the fact that multiple tumor subclones
establish themselves in environments such as the lymph node
may have therapeutic implications.
We provide evidence of spread of a tumor subclone from a
lymph node metastasis to a distant site (Figure 5J). Sequential
spread of metastasis from one site to another has also been
demonstrated in human pancreatic cancer (Campbell et al.,
2010; Yachida et al., 2010). These and our data raise the possi-
bility that lymph nodes can act as the site of collection of multiple
tumor subclones and may serve as a gateway for distant metas-
tases. These data are consistent with the prognostic implication
of sentinel lymph node biopsy in several cancer types (Chen
et al., 2006). However, whether seeding of lymph node metas-
tases prior to systemic dissemination is a more uniform property
of cancer metastasis will require additional studies. In addition,
it will be important to determine if additional genetic and or
Figure 6. Model of SCLC Tumorigenesis
Stepwise acquisition of recurrent driver mutations
identiﬁed
by
comparative
SCLC
sequencing
(D1–D4) promotes murine SCLC progression from
the pulmonary neuroendocrine cell to bona ﬁde
SCLC. As additional drivers are engineered into
the mouse model, tumor latency is reduced and
progression is accelerated. P, passenger muta-
tions ﬁxed in the tumor population during pro-
gression through the series of bottlenecks.
epigenetic alterations acquired in the
local
lymph
node
microenvironment
contribute
to systemic dissemination.
The ability to illuminate the dynamic
clonal
architecture
within
metastatic
mSCLC tumors highlights the opportunity
to more completely dissect clonal metastatic progression in
this experimentally tractable system.
A Model for Tumorigenesis in SCLC
The genomic and functional data presented here begin to estab-
lish a framework for tumorigenesis in SCLC (Figure 6). The near-
ubiquitous presence of TP53 and RB1 mutations in human SCLC
suggests that these are among the earliest events in these
tumors. In this genetic context, we believe Mycl1 ampliﬁcation
events provide a strong proliferative advantage. Although the
clonality analysis described in this study did not allow for charac-
terization of high-level ampliﬁcations, the ease of detection of the
Chr4 ampliﬁcations suggests that these ampliﬁcations arise
during early outgrowth of the primary tumor. In addition, the
occurrence of focal Chr4 ampliﬁcations in the setting of engi-
neered Pten deletion is a strong demonstration of the requisite
nature of Mycl1 ampliﬁcation in early mSCLC outgrowth. These
data also suggest that Pten mutations are selected for at later
stages of tumor progression, a notion supported by our Pten
IHC analysis showing tumors with areas both positive and nega-
tive for Pten expression.
Therapeutic targeting of Pten signaling with available high-
potency inhibitors of PI3K might therefore be warranted for
human SCLC. However, although we detect increased phos-
pho-Akt in advanced mSCLC, it is not certain that the effects
of Pten loss are entirely mediated via increased PI3K activity.
In addition, increased MYC DNA copy number or gene expres-
sion has been shown to mediate primary resistance to PI3K inhi-
bition (Ilic et al., 2011; Shepherd et al., 2013). Considering the
frequent occurrence of Chr4 ampliﬁcations involving Mycl1,
combination therapy targeting L-myc or biological effectors of
L-myc may be necessary to achieve effective responses.
Implications for Tumor Evolution in Mouse Cancer
Models
Characterization
of
PR
tumors
by
exome
and
genome
sequencing revealed a highly molded somatic genome with a
low somatic point mutation frequency relative to human cancers.
Interestingly, PRPt tumors exhibited a less-complex tumor
1308
Cell 156, 1298–1311, March 13, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc.

genome by DNA copy number analysis. This may reﬂect the
addition of a third driver event (Pten loss) at tumor initiation
that bypasses a critical bottleneck during tumor outgrowth.
This notion is supported by previous studies showing recurrent
acquisition of activating oncogene mutations in models initiated
by transgenes with relatively modest impact on proliferation
(Podsypanina et al., 2004). Therefore, although the initiating
engineered mutations are often credited with the entire tumor
phenotype, somatically acquired events should be considered
when interpreting results of both discovery efforts and preclinical
studies using mouse cancer models. The work described here
demonstrates the potential of harnessing the shared evolution
of GEMMs and human cancers using comparative genome
sequencing to identify acquired drivers of cancer progression
and dissect stepwise tumorigenesis.
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Mouse Model
p53ﬂ/ﬂ;Rbﬂ/ﬂand p53ﬂ/ﬂ;Rbﬂ/ﬂ;Rosa26LSL-Luc/LSL-Luc mice have been previously
described (Dooley et al., 2011; Rosa26LSL-Luc/LSL-Luc mice are from E. Jackson
and T.J., unpublished data). To obtain p53ﬂ/ﬂ;Rbﬂ/ﬂ;Rosa26LSL-Luc/LSL-Luc;
Ptenﬂ/ﬂmice, we obtained Ptenﬂ/ﬂanimals from Jackson Laboratories
(Ptentm1Hwu/j; Lesche et al., 2002). Tumors were initiated by adenoviral delivery
of Cre, as described previously (DuPage et al., 2009). The Massachusetts
Institute of Technology (MIT) Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee
approved all animal studies and procedures. Primary tumors and metastases
from the mouse model were dissected and snap-frozen for DNA and/or RNA
isolation as previously described (Dooley et al., 2011). In parallel, part of
each tumor was kept for histology to verify SCLC features. Live-animal imaging
was performed using an IVIS Spectrum (PerkinElmer) and Varian 7T/310/ASR
MRI system (Varian/Agilent Technologies).
Genome, Exome Sequencing
Whole-exome sequencing was performed as previously described (Gnirke
et al., 2009). Whole-genome sequencing was performed using a protocol
developed for human whole-genome studies (Berger et al., 2011). Low-
coverage whole-genome sequencing and DNA copy number analysis was
performed as previously described (Dooley et al., 2011). Mutations were
identiﬁed using MuTect (Cibulskis et al., 2013). Recurrence was assessed
using MutSig 1.0 with minor modiﬁcations for mouse data (Berger et al.,
2011; Getz et al., 2007). All somatic mutations were reviewed manually,
and validation of selected mutations was performed by targeted resequenc-
ing using microﬂuidic PCR (Access array system; Fluidigm) and the MiSeq
sequencing system (Illumina). Genomic rearrangements were identiﬁed by
dRanger (Berger et al., 2011). DNA copy number alterations were identiﬁed
from exome data using CapSeg (A.M., B. Hernandez, M. Meyerson, G.G.,
and S.L.C., unpublished data), and GISTIC 2.0 was used to identify
recurrent alterations (Beroukhim et al., 2010; Mermel et al., 2011). SegSeq
was used to identify copy number alterations (CNAs) from WGS data
(Chiang et al., 2009). See Extended Experimental Procedures for additional
details.
Immunohistochemical Analysis
IHC was performed on formalin-ﬁxed parafﬁn-embedded 4 mm sections using
the ImmPRESS Peroxidase Polymer Detection Kit (Vector Laboratories) with
recommended dilutions of primary antibodies (see Extended Experimental
Procedures).
Murine SCLC Cell Line Functional Experiments
Murine SCLC cell lines were maintained as previously described (Dooley et al.,
2011). Broad TRC shRNAs (shMagi1_83: TRCN0000079083, shMagi1_83:
TRCN0000079084) were used for Magi1 knockdown. Following infection
with Magi1 or control shRNA-expressing lentiviruses, cells were selected
using puromycin (Sigma). After puromycin selection, cells viability was as-
sessed by Cell Titer Glo (Promega).
ABSOLUTE Analysis and Deductive Logic of Clonal Evolution
Mapping
ABSOLUTE was performed as previously described (Carter et al., 2012;
Landau et al., 2013). All mutations that deﬁne clonal lineages underwent exten-
sive manual review using IGV (Robinson et al., 2011) to ensure models were
generated using high-conﬁdence mutations.
ACCESSION NUMBERS
The NCBI BioProject accession number for the sequences reported in this
paper is PRJNA223640.
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental Information includes Extended Experimental Procedures, ﬁve
ﬁgures, and one table and can be found with this article online at http://dx.
doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2014.02.031.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
D.G.M., T.J., and G.G. designed the study, and D.G.M. wrote the manuscript.
D.G.M. and T.P. equally contributed to biological interpretation of sequencing
results and performed experiments. A.T.-W. and C.S. contributed equally to
analysis of sequencing data. S.C. performed ABSOLUTE analysis of
sequencing data. Inference of clonal evolution was performed by S.C.,
D.G.M., T.P., and A.T.-W. G.G. and T.J. supervised data analysis and
experiments.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We acknowledge Denise Crowley and the Swanson Biotechnology Core Facil-
ity for histology preparation and IHC; Harold Varmus, Nadya Dimitrova, and
Eric L. Snyder for critical review of the manuscript; and Peter Campbell for a
fruitful discussion. This work was supported by the Ludwig Center for Molec-
ular Oncology at MIT (to T.J.), the Howard Hughes Medical Institute (to T.J.),
the National Human Genome Research Institute (to S.G. and G.G.), NIH-NCI
Career Development award K08CA160658 (to D.G.M.), and a Hope Funds
for Cancer Research Fellowship (to T.P.). G.G. is the Paul C. Zamecnik, MD,
Chair in Oncology at Massachusetts General Hospital. T.J. is the David H.
Koch Professor of Biology and a Daniel K. Ludwig Scholar at MIT. The authors
wish to dedicate this paper to the memory of Ofﬁcer Sean Collier, for his caring
service to the MIT community and for his sacriﬁce.
Received: July 14, 2013
Revised: November 27, 2013
Accepted: February 12, 2014
Published: March 13, 2014
REFERENCES
Baca, S.C., Prandi, D., Lawrence, M.S., Mosquera, J.M., Romanel, A., Drier,
Y., Park, K., Kitabayashi, N., MacDonald, T.Y., Ghandi, M., et al. (2013). Punc-
tuated evolution of prostate cancer genomes. Cell 153, 666–677.
Berger, M.F., Lawrence, M.S., Demichelis, F., Drier, Y., Cibulskis, K., Siva-
chenko, A.Y., Sboner, A., Esgueva, R., Pﬂueger, D., Sougnez, C., et al.
(2011). The genomic complexity of primary human prostate cancer. Nature
470, 214–220.
Beroukhim, R., Getz, G., Nghiemphu, L., Barretina, J., Hsueh, T., Linhart, D.,
Vivanco, I., Lee, J.C., Huang, J.H., Alexander, S., et al. (2007). Assessing the
signiﬁcance of chromosomal aberrations in cancer: methodology and applica-
tion to glioma. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 104, 20007–20012.
Beroukhim, R., Mermel, C.H., Porter, D., Wei, G., Raychaudhuri, S., Donovan,
J., Barretina, J., Boehm, J.S., Dobson, J., Urashima, M., et al. (2010). The
Cell 156, 1298–1311, March 13, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc.
1309

landscape of somatic copy-number alteration across human cancers. Nature
463, 899–905.
Biankin, A.V., Waddell, N., Kassahn, K.S., Gingras, M.C., Muthuswamy, L.B.,
Johns, A.L., Miller, D.K., Wilson, P.J., Patch, A.M., Wu, J., et al.; Australian
Pancreatic Cancer Genome Initiative (2012). Pancreatic cancer genomes
reveal aberrations in axon guidance pathway genes. Nature 491, 399–405.
Calbo´ , J., Meuwissen, R., van Montfort, E., van Tellingen, O., and Berns, A.
(2005). Genotype-phenotype relationships in a mouse model for human
small-cell lung cancer. Cold Spring Harb. Symp. Quant. Biol. 70, 225–232.
Califano, R., Abidin, A.Z., Peck, R., Faivre-Finn, C., and Lorigan, P. (2012).
Management of small cell lung cancer: recent developments for optimal
care. Drugs 72, 471–490.
Campbell, P.J., Yachida, S., Mudie, L.J., Stephens, P.J., Pleasance, E.D.,
Stebbings, L.A., Morsberger, L.A., Latimer, C., McLaren, S., Lin, M.L., et al.
(2010). The patterns and dynamics of genomic instability in metastatic pancre-
atic cancer. Nature 467, 1109–1113.
Carter, S.L., Cibulskis, K., Helman, E., McKenna, A., Shen, H., Zack, T., Laird,
P.W., Onofrio, R.C., Winckler, W., Weir, B.A., et al. (2012). Absolute quantiﬁca-
tion of somatic DNA alterations in human cancer. Nat. Biotechnol. 30,
413–421.
Chen, S.L., Iddings, D.M., Scheri, R.P., and Bilchik, A.J. (2006). Lymphatic
mapping and sentinel node analysis: current concepts and applications. CA
Cancer J. Clin. 56, 292–309.
Chiang, D.Y., Getz, G., Jaffe, D.B., O’Kelly, M.J., Zhao, X., Carter, S.L., Russ,
C., Nusbaum, C., Meyerson, M., and Lander, E.S. (2009). High-resolution
mapping of copy-number alterations with massively parallel sequencing.
Nat. Methods 6, 99–103.
Cibulskis, K., Lawrence, M.S., Carter, S.L., Sivachenko, A., Jaffe, D., Sougnez,
C., Gabriel, S., Meyerson, M., Lander, E.S., and Getz, G. (2013). Sensitive
detection of somatic point mutations in impure and heterogeneous cancer
samples. Nat. Biotechnol. 31, 213–219.
Dacic, S., Finkelstein, S.D., Baksh, F.K., Swalsky, P.A., Barnes, L.E., and
Yousem, S.A. (2002). Small-cell neuroendocrine carcinoma displays unique
proﬁles of tumor-suppressor gene loss in relationship to the primary site of
formation. Hum. Pathol. 33, 927–932.
Dooley, A.L., Winslow, M.M., Chiang, D.Y., Banerji, S., Stransky, N., Dayton,
T.L., Snyder, E.L., Senna, S., Whittaker, C.A., Bronson, R.T., et al. (2011).
Nuclear factor I/B is an oncogene in small cell lung cancer. Genes Dev. 25,
1470–1475.
DuPage, M., Dooley, A.L., and Jacks, T. (2009). Conditional mouse lung cancer
models using adenoviral or lentiviral delivery of Cre recombinase. Nat. Protoc.
4, 1064–1072.
Forbes, S.A., Bindal, N., Bamford, S., Cole, C., Kok, C.Y., Beare, D., Jia, M.,
Shepherd, R., Leung, K., Menzies, A., et al. (2011). COSMIC: mining complete
cancer genomes in the Catalogue of Somatic Mutations in Cancer. Nucleic
Acids Res. 39 (Database issue), D945–D950.
Forgacs, E., Biesterveld, E.J., Sekido, Y., Fong, K., Muneer, S., Wistuba, I.I.,
Milchgrub, S., Brezinschek, R., Virmani, A., Gazdar, A.F., and Minna, J.D.
(1998). Mutation analysis of the PTEN/MMAC1 gene in lung cancer. Oncogene
17, 1557–1565.
Gerlinger, M., Rowan, A.J., Horswell, S., Larkin, J., Endesfelder, D., Gronroos,
E., Martinez, P., Matthews, N., Stewart, A., Tarpey, P., et al. (2012). Intratumor
heterogeneity and branched evolution revealed by multiregion sequencing.
N. Engl. J. Med. 366, 883–892.
Getz, G., Ho¨ ﬂing, H., Mesirov, J.P., Golub, T.R., Meyerson, M., Tibshirani, R.,
and Lander, E.S. (2007). Comment on ‘‘The consensus coding sequences of
human breast and colorectal cancers’’. Science 317, 1500.
Gilbert, L.A., and Hemann, M.T. (2010). DNA damage-mediated induction of a
chemoresistant niche. Cell 143, 355–366.
Gnirke, A., Melnikov, A., Maguire, J., Rogov, P., LeProust, E.M., Brockman,
W., Fennell, T., Giannoukos, G., Fisher, S., Russ, C., et al. (2009). Solution
hybrid selection with ultra-long oligonucleotides for massively parallel targeted
sequencing. Nat. Biotechnol. 27, 182–189.
Ha¨ cker, H., and Karin, M. (2006). Regulation and function of IKK and IKK-
related kinases. Sci. STKE 2006, re13.
Hanahan, D., and Weinberg, R.A. (2011). Hallmarks of cancer: the next gener-
ation. Cell 144, 646–674.
Ilic, N., Utermark, T., Widlund, H.R., and Roberts, T.M. (2011). PI3K-targeted
therapy can be evaded by gene ampliﬁcation along the MYC-eukaryotic trans-
lation initiation factor 4E (eIF4E) axis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 108, E699–
E708.
Jackman, D.M., and Johnson, B.E. (2005). Small-cell lung cancer. Lancet 366,
1385–1396.
Jones, S., Chen, W.D., Parmigiani, G., Diehl, F., Beerenwinkel, N., Antal, T.,
Traulsen, A., Nowak, M.A., Siegel, C., Velculescu, V.E., et al. (2008). Compar-
ative lesion sequencing provides insights into tumor evolution. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 105, 4283–4288.
Korbel, J.O., and Campbell, P.J. (2013). Criteria for inference of chromothripsis
in cancer genomes. Cell 152, 1226–1236.
Kotelevets, L., van Hengel, J., Bruyneel, E., Mareel, M., van Roy, F., and
Chastre, E. (2005). Implication of the MAGI-1b/PTEN signalosome in stabiliza-
tion of adherens junctions and suppression of invasiveness. FASEB J. 19,
115–117.
Landau, D.A., Carter, S.L., Stojanov, P., McKenna, A., Stevenson, K.,
Lawrence, M.S., Sougnez, C., Stewart, C., Sivachenko, A., Wang, L., et al.
(2013). Evolution and impact of subclonal mutations in chronic lymphocytic
leukemia. Cell 152, 714–726.
Lawrence, M.S., Stojanov, P., Polak, P., Kryukov, G.V., Cibulskis, K., Siva-
chenko, A., Carter, S.L., Stewart, C., Mermel, C.H., Roberts, S.A., et al.
(2013). Mutational heterogeneity in cancer and the search for new cancer-
associated genes. Nature 499, 214–218.
Lesche, R., Groszer, M., Gao, J., Wang, Y., Messing, A., Sun, H., Liu, X., and
Wu, H. (2002). Cre/loxP-mediated inactivation of the murine Pten tumor
suppressor gene. Genesis 32, 148–149.
Mao, J.H., Wu, D., Perez-Losada, J., Nagase, H., DelRosario, R., and Balmain,
A. (2003). Genetic interactions between Pten and p53 in radiation-induced
lymphoma development. Oncogene 22, 8379–8385.
Mao, J.H., Perez-Losada, J., Wu, D., Delrosario, R., Tsunematsu, R.,
Nakayama, K.I., Brown, K., Bryson, S., and Balmain, A. (2004). Fbxw7/Cdc4
is a p53-dependent, haploinsufﬁcient tumour suppressor gene. Nature 432,
775–779.
Matsushita, H., Vesely, M.D., Koboldt, D.C., Rickert, C.G., Uppaluri, R.,
Magrini, V.J., Arthur, C.D., White, J.M., Chen, Y.S., Shea, L.K., et al. (2012).
Cancer exome analysis reveals a T-cell-dependent mechanism of cancer
immunoediting. Nature 482, 400–404.
Mermel, C.H., Schumacher, S.E., Hill, B., Meyerson, M.L., Beroukhim, R., and
Getz, G. (2011). GISTIC2.0 facilitates sensitive and conﬁdent localization of the
targets of focal somatic copy-number alteration in human cancers. Genome
Biol. 12, R41.
Meuwissen, R., Linn, S.C., Linnoila, R.I., Zevenhoven, J., Mooi, W.J., and
Berns, A. (2003). Induction of small cell lung cancer by somatic inactivation
of both Trp53 and Rb1 in a conditional mouse model. Cancer Cell 4, 181–189.
Nowell, P.C. (1976). The clonal evolution of tumor cell populations. Science
194, 23–28.
O’Neil, J., Calvo, J., McKenna, K., Krishnamoorthy, V., Aster, J.C., Bassing,
C.H., Alt, F.W., Kelliher, M., and Look, A.T. (2006). Activating Notch1 mutations
in mouse models of T-ALL. Blood 107, 781–785.
Peifer, M., Ferna´ ndez-Cuesta, L., Sos, M.L., George, J., Seidel, D., Kasper,
L.H., Plenker, D., Leenders, F., Sun, R., Zander, T., et al. (2012). Integrative
genome analyses identify key somatic driver mutations of small-cell lung
cancer. Nat. Genet. 44, 1104–1110.
Pilarski, R., Stephens, J.A., Noss, R., Fisher, J.L., and Prior, T.W. (2011).
Predicting PTEN mutations: an evaluation of Cowden syndrome and
Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome clinical features. J. Med. Genet. 48,
505–512.
1310
Cell 156, 1298–1311, March 13, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc.

Podsypanina, K., Li, Y., and Varmus, H.E. (2004). Evolution of somatic muta-
tions in mammary tumors in transgenic mice is inﬂuenced by the inherited
genotype. BMC Med. 2, 24.
Rausch, T., Jones, D.T., Zapatka, M., Stu¨ tz, A.M., Zichner, T., Weischenfeldt,
J., Ja¨ ger, N., Remke, M., Shih, D., Northcott, P.A., et al. (2012). Genome
sequencing of pediatric medulloblastoma links catastrophic DNA rearrange-
ments with TP53 mutations. Cell 148, 59–71.
Robinson, J.T., Thorvaldsdottir, H., Winckler, W., Guttman, M., Lander, E.S.,
Getz, G., and Mesirov, J.P. (2011). Integrative genomics viewer. Nat. Bio-
technol 29, 24–26.
Rudin, C.M., Durinck, S., Stawiski, E.W., Poirier, J.T., Modrusan, Z., Shames,
D.S., Bergbower, E.A., Guan, Y., Shin, J., Guillory, J., et al. (2012). Comprehen-
sive genomic analysis identiﬁes SOX2 as a frequently ampliﬁed gene in small-
cell lung cancer. Nat. Genet. 44, 1111–1116.
Shepherd, C., Banerjee, L., Cheung, C.W., Mansour, M.R., Jenkinson, S.,
Gale, R.E., and Khwaja, A. (2013). PI3K/mTOR inhibition upregulates
NOTCH-MYC signalling leading to an impaired cytotoxic response. Leukemia
27, 650–660.
Song, H., Yao, E., Lin, C., Gacayan, R., Chen, M.H., and Chuang, P.T. (2012).
Functional characterization of pulmonary neuroendocrine cells in lung devel-
opment, injury, and tumorigenesis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 109, 17531–
17536.
Sutherland, K.D., Proost, N., Brouns, I., Adriaensen, D., Song, J.Y., and Berns,
A. (2011). Cell of origin of small cell lung cancer: inactivation of Trp53 and Rb1
in distinct cell types of adult mouse lung. Cancer Cell 19, 754–764.
Sweet-Cordero, A., Tseng, G.C., You, H., Douglass, M., Huey, B., Albertson,
D., and Jacks, T. (2006). Comparison of gene expression and DNA copy
number changes in a murine model of lung cancer. Genes Chromosomes
Cancer 45, 338–348.
To, M.D., Quigley, D.A., Mao, J.H., Del Rosario, R., Hsu, J., Hodgson, G.,
Jacks, T., and Balmain, A. (2011). Progressive genomic instability in the
FVB/Kras(LA2) mouse model of lung cancer. Mol. Cancer Res. 9, 1339–1345.
Tsou, H.C., Ping, X.L., Xie, X.X., Gruener, A.C., Zhang, H., Nini, R., Swisshelm,
K., Sybert, V., Diamond, T.M., Sutphen, R., and Peacocke, M. (1998). The
genetic basis of Cowden’s syndrome: three novel mutations in PTEN/
MMAC1/TEP1. Hum. Genet. 102, 467–473.
Wartman, L.D., Larson, D.E., Xiang, Z., Ding, L., Chen, K., Lin, L., Cahan, P.,
Klco, J.M., Welch, J.S., Li, C., et al. (2011). Sequencing a mouse acute
promyelocytic leukemia genome reveals genetic events relevant for disease
progression. J. Clin. Invest. 121, 1445–1455.
Wegmann, F., Ebnet, K., Du Pasquier, L., Vestweber, D., and Butz, S. (2004).
Endothelial adhesion molecule ESAM binds directly to the multidomain
adaptor MAGI-1 and recruits it to cell contacts. Exp. Cell Res. 300, 121–133.
Wistuba, I.I., Gazdar, A.F., and Minna, J.D. (2001). Molecular genetics of small
cell lung carcinoma. Semin. Oncol. 28 (2, Suppl 4), 3–13.
Wu, X., Hepner, K., Castelino-Prabhu, S., Do, D., Kaye, M.B., Yuan, X.J.,
Wood, J., Ross, C., Sawyers, C.L., and Whang, Y.E. (2000). Evidence for regu-
lation of the PTEN tumor suppressor by a membrane-localized multi-PDZ
domain containing scaffold protein MAGI-2. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 97,
4233–4238.
Yachida, S., Jones, S., Bozic, I., Antal, T., Leary, R., Fu, B., Kamiyama, M.,
Hruban, R.H., Eshleman, J.R., Nowak, M.A., et al. (2010). Distant metastasis
occurs late during the genetic evolution of pancreatic cancer. Nature 467,
1114–1117.
Yokomizo, A., Tindall, D.J., Drabkin, H., Gemmill, R., Franklin, W., Yang, P.,
Sugio, K., Smith, D.I., and Liu, W. (1998). PTEN/MMAC1 mutations identiﬁed
in small cell, but not in non-small cell lung cancers. Oncogene 17, 475–479.
Yuan, W., Stawiski, E., Janakiraman, V., Chan, E., Durinck, S., Edgar, K.A.,
Kljavin, N.M., Rivers, C.S., Gnad, F., Roose-Girma, M., et al. (2012). Condi-
tional activation of Pik3ca(H1047R) in a knock-in mouse model promotes
mammary tumorigenesis and emergence of mutations. Oncogene 32,
318–326.
Zmajkovicova, K., Jesenberger, V., Catalanotti, F., Baumgartner, C., Reyes,
G., and Baccarini, M. (2013). MEK1 is required for PTEN membrane recruit-
ment, AKT regulation, and the maintenance of peripheral tolerance. Mol. Cell
50, 43–55.
Cell 156, 1298–1311, March 13, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc.
1311

Supplemental Information
EXTENDED EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Exome and Genome Sequencing
To isolate DNA from tumors and normal tissue, samples were digested in 800 mg/mL proteinase K overnight at 55C and phenol/
chloroform-extracted and alcohol precipitated using standard techniques. Tumor RNA was isolated using RNAqueous kit (Life tech-
nologies, CA). Sequencing was performed as previously described (Blumenstiel et al., 2010; Costello et al., 2013; Fisher et al., 2011;
Gnirke et al., 2009). Brieﬂy, 0.5-3 mg of DNA from each sample was used for library preparation, which included shearing and ligation
of sequencing adaptors. Exome capture was performed using the Agilent SureSelect XT Mouse All Exon Kit. DNA was sequenced
using the Illumina HiSeq platform, and paired-end sequencing reads of length 76bp and average fragment lengths of 150bp (range
104-168bp) were generated for each sample. Samples were multiplexed and sequenced on multiple Illumina HiSeq ﬂow cells to
average target exome coverage of 105.7x in tumor DNA and 85.8x in normal tissue DNA sampled from the tail. WGS reads were
of length 101bp with average fragment lengths of 335bp (range 216 to 361bp per library) to an average depth of coverage of
136.2x for tumor samples and 55.4x for normal samples. Alignments to mm9 (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/assembly/165668/) using
bwa (Li and Durbin, 2010) version 0.5.9-r16 and quality control were performed using the Picard (http://picard.sourceforge.net/) and
Firehose (http://dx.doi.org/10.7908/C180514N) pipelines at the Broad Institute. Firehose is a framework combining workﬂows for the
analysis of cancer sequencing data. The workﬂows perform quality control, local realignment, mutation calling, small insertion and
deletion identiﬁcation, rearrangement detection, and coverage calculations, among other analyses. Although the pipeline was devel-
oped for human cancer analysis, modiﬁcations to the pipeline enabled the analysis of mouse sequence data.
Mutation Calling
The MuTect algorithm (http://www.broadinstitute.org/cancer/cga/mutect) was used to identify somatic mutations in targeted exons
and whole-genome data (Cibulskis et al., 2013). MuTect identiﬁes candidate somatic mutations by Bayesian statistical analysis of
bases and their qualities in the tumor and normal BAM ﬁles at a given genomic locus. The lowest allelic fraction at which somatic
mutations could be detected on a per-sample basis was estimated based on cross-contamination level of 2%. All somatic mutations
were reviewed manually from their respective BAM ﬁles using the Integrative Genomics Viewer (Robinson et al., 2011).
Mutation Signiﬁcance Analysis
For the purpose of discovering recurrently mutated genes, we used the MutSig 1.0 algorithm (http://www.broadinstitute.org/cancer/
cga/mutsig), as described (Berger et al., 2011; Chapman et al., 2011; Getz et al., 2007; Lee et al., 2012) with slight modiﬁcations for
mouse data. In short, this method builds a background model of mutational processes, which takes into account the genome-wide
variability in mutation rates. Each gene is assigned a p value quantifying how consistent the observed mutations are relative to the
background mutation rate. The false detection rate is then estimated from the p values (Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995) and the
genes are ranked according to the signiﬁcance of the excess of nonsilent mutations beyond the background mutation rate.
Compared to MutSig CV (Lawrence et al., 2013) MutSig 1.0 does not consider many covariates, several of which are not readily avail-
able for model organisms, such as replication time or tissue-speciﬁc expression, but its relative simplicity is well suited for analysis of
low mutation rate tumors such as the mouse SCLC model. To preclude ‘‘double-counting’’ of shared mutations in related primary
tumor-metastasis pairs, we compressed mutations across related samples, keeping only the event occurring in the primary tumor.
Identiﬁcation of Rearrangements
The dRanger algorithm (Baca et al., 2013; Berger et al., 2011; Chapman et al., 2011; Hodis et al., 2012; Imielinski et al., 2012) was
used to detect genomic rearrangements by identifying instances where the two read pairs mapped to distinct regions of the genome
or mapped in a manner that suggested another structural event such as an inversion. Candidate somatic rearrangements were
queried in both the matched normal genome and a panel of nontumor genomes to remove germ-line events. The Breakpointer
algorithm (Drier et al., 2013) (http://www.broadinstitute.org/cancer/cga/breakpointer) scanned for split read supporting evidence
at the sites of all candidate rearrangements. To compensate for the low number of normal mouse WGS samples, and the lower
coverage within those samples, we required a more stringent standard of evidence than those used for human studies. For each
rearrangement site found within a tumor or corresponding met sample, at least one of the samples must have a dRanger
score R 7 (observed in at least 7 read pairs) as well as Breakpointer conﬁrmation were required in this analysis.
Tumor Purity
Tumor purity was estimated based on the degree of remaining normal read coverage within the engineered Trp53 deletion. For each
sample the observed count of uniquely mapped reads within the deleted region (chr11:69396589-69404536) was tallied for tumor as
well as for normal samples. Read depth was also measured for all other genomic locations in bins of 10Mb. For each tumor sample,
coverage was linearly ﬁt to the corresponding normal coverage. Outlier bins were removed from the ﬁt to minimize the effect of large
somatic copy alternations in the tumor sample. The linear ﬁt provided the expected number of tumor reads (Nexp) as a function of
normal read coverage, which was then compared to the observed number of tumor reads in the Trp53 region (Nobs). The estimated
tumor purity is then purity = 1-Nobs/Nexp, with conﬁdence intervals based on the Poisson error in Nexp, as well as the uncertainty of the
linear ﬁt.
Cell 156, 1298–1311, March 13, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc.
S1

Somatic Copy Number Alternation Detection
Somatic copy number alterations (SCNAs) were identiﬁed from the whole exome data from the ratio of tumor read depth to the
expected read depth derived from a panel of normal samples using the CapSeg program (A.M., B. Hernandez, M. Meyerson,
G.G., and S.L.C., unpublished data). The SegSeq program (Chiang et al., 2009) was used for SCNA detection in WGS data. We
utilized GISTIC 2.0 to identify recurrent events in primary mSCLC tumors to avoid over-representing shared events between related
primary tumor-metastasis pairs. The GISTIC2 program (Beroukhim et al., 2010) was adapted for mouse analysis based on CapSeg
SCNAs.
Validation
Validation of selected mutations was performed by targeted resequencing using microﬂuidic PCR (Access array system, Fluidigm)
and the MiSeq sequencing system (Illumina). In total, 322 putative mutations were validated by this approach, including 100 muta-
tions chosen at random and an additional 222 mutations of biological interest. Tumor and matched normal samples were selected
based on the presence of the indicated mutations by whole exome sequencing. Target speciﬁc primers were designed to ﬂank sites
of interest and produce amplicons of 200 bp ± 20 bp. Molecularly barcoded, Illumina-compatible speciﬁc oligos, containing
sequences complementary to the primer tails were added to the access array chip in the same well as the genomic DNA samples
(20–50 ng of input) such that all amplicons for a given genomic sample share the same index. PCR was performed on the Fluidigm
access array according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Indexed libraries were recovered for each sample in a single collection
well from the Fluidigm chip, quantiﬁed using picogreen, and then normalized for uniformity across libraries. Resulting normalized
libraries were loaded on the MiSeq instrument and sequenced using paired end 150 bp sequencing reads (Lohr et al., 2012). These
data revealed that 84% of calls that were adequately covered in the experiment passed validation (Table S1G). Second, overlapping
exome and whole genome sequencing data for 14 samples for which both data sets were obtained revealed a 95% validation rate for
exome calls (Figure S2B). In addition, all Pten mutations that were identiﬁed by whole exome sequencing were validated by direct
sequencing: Pten exons were ampliﬁed from tumor DNA and corresponding normal tissue by Primestar HT polymerase using primers
ﬂanking the point mutations (Exon 1 - T26P, Exon 5 - T131P, Exon7 - splice_site). PCR products were puriﬁed using ExoSAP-IT
(Affymetrix). The puriﬁed products were directly sequenced using a 3730 Capillary DNA sequencer with Big Dye Terminator Cycle
sequencing kit (Applied Biosystems). Sequencing data were visualized using 4Peaks software. Genomic rearrangements were
selected for validation by a) manual review of sequencing reads, b) if the rearrangement generated a putative fusion protein, and
c) biological interest. PCR oligonucleotides were designed to span the breakpoint and to span the wild-type locus. PCR was then
performed using mouse tail DNA as a germline control and tumor DNA. PCR products were resolved on agarose gels, and positive
products were sequenced directly to conﬁrm the presence of the putative breakpoint.
Comparison of mSCLC Alterations to Human SCLC
To assess the overlap of somatic copy number alterations between human studies and our mouse model, we selected two compre-
hensive papers in the ﬁeld and compared their reported recurrent focal and arm level somatic copy number alterations with our
GISTIC focal and arm level results (Peifer et al., 2012; Rudin et al., 2012). We mapped mouse gene identiﬁers to hg19 symbols using
the Jackson Laboratory homology table (http://www.informatics.jax.org/homology.shtml). Next, we converted the human symbols to
hg19 and subset both mouse and human data sets so that we only compared genes that had a homology mapping. We then used this
map to compare our two sets and visualized our data set using Venny (http://bioinfogp.cnb.csic.es/tools/venny). To determine the
signiﬁcance of the overlap between studies we constructed two (ampliﬁcations and deletions) 2x2 Fishers contingency tables for
each paper. We also compared somatic mutations found in the papers with our mouse model. We again, mapped the mouse
gene identiﬁers to hg19 symbols using the Jackson Laboratory homology table and converted all human symbols to hg19. In this
comparison we used all ‘‘signiﬁcantly mutated,’’ ‘‘hotspot,’’ and ‘‘clustered mutations’’ from Rudin et al. and Peifer et al. We consid-
ered mutations as a shared event regardless of position with the gene. For comparisons to human data shown in Figure 1, we
compared the frequency of events in mSCLC to published human data sets (Bass et al., 2011; Berger et al., 2011; Beroukhim
et al., 2010; Chapman et al., 2011; Greenman et al., 2007; Lohr et al., 2012; Stransky et al., 2011).
Antibodies for IHC
IHC was performed using the following antibodies: CGRP (C8198, Sigma, 1:5000) pAKT(S473) (#9271, Cell Signaling, 1/100), Pten
(#9188, Cell Signaling, 1/100), Cleaved Caspase-3 (#9661, Cell Signaling, MA, 1/100) and phospho-histone3 (#9701, Cell Signaling,
1/100). Sections were developed with DAB and counterstained with hematoxylin. Tumor size (mm2), apoptotis (number of cleaved
caspase-3 cells/mm2) and mitotic index (number of phospho-H3 cells/mm2) of PR, PRPt and PRPt/+ tumors were quantiﬁed using
a Nikon 80i scope and the NIS-Elements Software (Nikon, NY). Haematoxylin and eosin staining was performed using standard
methods.
Live Animal Imaging
For bioluminescence imaging of tumors expressing a conditional luciferase allele, mice were scanned for 60 s under isoﬂurane anes-
thesia using an IVIS Spectrum imaging system (Perkin Elmer) and signal (Total Flux; photons/Sec) in the lung was quantiﬁed using
Living Image (Perkin Elmer). For MRI imaging isoﬂurane anesthetized animals were scanned using a Varian 7T/310/ASR-whole
S2
Cell 156, 1298–1311, March 13, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc.

mouse MRI system (Varian/Agilent). FSEMS (fast spin echo multi-slice) images were acquired with parameters: 2000ms TR; 12ms TE;
256X256 binning; 20 slices at 1mm thickness. Respiratory movement artifacts were minimized by using respiratory gating (Model
1025T, SA Instruments). Tumor volumes (mm3) were measured using Varian VnmrJ 2.3A software to generate regions of interest
around tumors from consecutive 1mm thick slices.
Immunoblotting
Anti-pAKT(S473) (Cell Signaling, 1: 1000), anti- pAKT(T308) (Cell Signaling, 1: 1000), anti-Akt (Cell Signaling, 1: 1000) were used for
western blotting following standard methods.
RNA Puriﬁcation, Reverse Transcription, and Real-Time PCR
RNA was isolated following manufacturer’s instructions for TRIzol (Invitrogen). 1.5 mg of RNA was reverse transcribed following
manufacturer’s instructions for High-Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription (Applied Biosystems). cDNA was then diluted 1:10 for
real time PCR reactions. Real time PCR reactions on genomic DNA were performed using 10 ng (mouse tumor) of DNA. All cDNA
and genomic DNA real time PCR reactions were performed using SYBR green and Taqman (Life Technologies) respectively. Reac-
tions were performed in triplicate and normalized to the levels of an internal control and analyzed using the comparative Ct method.
Genomic DNA Primers: mycl1 Mm00558485_cn, Control/Reference Tfrc and Tert. cDNA primers: Magi1 F: 50 GGAAGGCTCAA
CAAGGACCTA, Magi1 R: 50 GGTAGAGGTTGTCCCTTATGGT, Gapdh F: 50 TTTGATGTTAGTGGGGTCTCG, Gapdh R: 50
AGCTTGTCATCAACGGGAAG.
SUPPLEMENTAL REFERENCES
Bass, A.J., Lawrence, M.S., Brace, L.E., Ramos, A.H., Drier, Y., Cibulskis, K., Sougnez, C., Voet, D., Saksena, G., Sivachenko, A., et al. (2011). Genomic
sequencing of colorectal adenocarcinomas identiﬁes a recurrent VTI1A-TCF7L2 fusion. Nat. Genet. 43, 964–968.
Benjamini, Y., and Hochberg, Y. (1995). Controlling the false discovery rate: a practical and powerful approach to multiple testing. J. R. Stat. Soc., B 57, 289–300.
Blumenstiel, B., Cibulskis, K., Fisher, S., DeFelice, M., Barry, A., Fennell, T., Abreu, J., Minie, B., Costello, M., Young, G., et al. (2010). Targeted exon sequencing
by in-solution hybrid selection. Curr. Protoc. Hum. Genet. Chapter 18, Unit 18.4.
Chapman, M.A., Lawrence, M.S., Keats, J.J., Cibulskis, K., Sougnez, C., Schinzel, A.C., Harview, C.L., Brunet, J.P., Ahmann, G.J., Adli, M., et al. (2011). Initial
genome sequencing and analysis of multiple myeloma. Nature 471, 467–472.
Costello, M., Pugh, T.J., Fennell, T.J., Stewart, C., Lichtenstein, L., Meldrim, J.C., Fostel, J.L., Friedrich, D.C., Perrin, D., Dionne, D., et al. (2013). Discovery and
characterization of artifactual mutations in deep coverage targeted capture sequencing data due to oxidative DNA damage during sample preparation. Nucleic
Acids Res. 41, e67.
Drier, Y., Lawrence, M.S., Carter, S.L., Stewart, C., Gabriel, S.B., Lander, E.S., Meyerson, M., Beroukhim, R., and Getz, G. (2013). Somatic rearrangements
across cancer reveal classes of samples with distinct patterns of DNA breakage and rearrangement-induced hypermutability. Genome Res. 23, 228–235.
Fisher, S., Barry, A., Abreu, J., Minie, B., Nolan, J., Delorey, T.M., Young, G., Fennell, T.J., Allen, A., Ambrogio, L., et al. (2011). A scalable, fully automated process
for construction of sequence-ready human exome targeted capture libraries. Genome Biol. 12, R1.
Getz, G., Ho¨ ﬂing, H., Mesirov, J.P., Golub, T.R., Meyerson, M., Tibshirani, R., and Lander, E.S. (2007). Comment on ‘‘The consensus coding sequences of human
breast and colorectal cancers’’. Science 317, 1500.
Greenman, C., Stephens, P., Smith, R., Dalgliesh, G.L., Hunter, C., Bignell, G., Davies, H., Teague, J., Butler, A., Stevens, C., et al. (2007). Patterns of somatic
mutation in human cancer genomes. Nature 446, 153–158.
Hodis, E., Watson, I.R., Kryukov, G.V., Arold, S.T., Imielinski, M., Theurillat, J.P., Nickerson, E., Auclair, D., Li, L., Place, C., et al. (2012). A landscape of driver
mutations in melanoma. Cell 150, 251–263.
Imielinski, M., Berger, A.H., Hammerman, P.S., Hernandez, B., Pugh, T.J., Hodis, E., Cho, J., Suh, J., Capelletti, M., Sivachenko, A., et al. (2012). Mapping the
hallmarks of lung adenocarcinoma with massively parallel sequencing. Cell 150, 1107–1120.
Lee, R.S., Stewart, C., Carter, S.L., Ambrogio, L., Cibulskis, K., Sougnez, C., Lawrence, M.S., Auclair, D., Mora, J., Golub, T.R., et al. (2012). A remarkably simple
genome underlies highly malignant pediatric rhabdoid cancers. J. Clin. Invest. 122, 2983–2988.
Li, H., and Durbin, R. (2010). Fast and accurate long-read alignment with Burrows-Wheeler transform. Bioinformatics 26, 589–595.
Lohr, J.G., Stojanov, P., Lawrence, M.S., Auclair, D., Chapuy, B., Sougnez, C., Cruz-Gordillo, P., Knoechel, B., Asmann, Y.W., Slager, S.L., et al. (2012). Discovery
and prioritization of somatic mutations in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) by whole-exome sequencing. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 109, 3879–3884.
Robinson, J.T., Thorvaldsdo´ ttir, H., Winckler, W., Guttman, M., Lander, E.S., Getz, G., and Mesirov, J.P. (2011). Integrative genomics viewer. Nat. Biotechnol. 29,
24–26.
Stransky, N., Egloff, A.M., Tward, A.D., Kostic, A.D., Cibulskis, K., Sivachenko, A., Kryukov, G.V., Lawrence, M.S., Sougnez, C., McKenna, A., et al. (2011). The
mutational landscape of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma. Science 333, 1157–1160.
Cell 156, 1298–1311, March 13, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc.
S3

Figure S1. Whole-Genome Sequencing Identiﬁes Highly Rearranged mSCLC Genomes, Related to Figure 1
(A) Types of genomic rearrangements detected by individual tumor.
(B) Chromosomal distribution of rearrangements. Note Chr4 rearrangements account for the majority of all events.
(legend continued on next page)
S4
Cell 156, 1298–1311, March 13, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc.

(C) Top: DNA copy number alteration level across Chr4 for tumor AD3151-T1 from CapSeg exome read depth. Middle: Pattern of rearrangements showing the
start and end coordinates of each event based on alignments of the supporting WGS read fragments. Events are color-coded to indicate the read pair
oprientation. ‘‘FR’’ is a ‘‘forward-reverse’’ pair orientation consistent with a deletion event’ ‘‘RF’’ or ‘‘reverse-forward’’ is consistent with a tandem duplication, and
‘‘FF’’ or ‘‘RR’’ are consistent with inversion events. Bottom: Pattern of 30 and 50 ends of rearrangements. An alternating pattern of 30 and 50 ends is characteristic of
chromothripsis; however, the pattern shown here is suggestive of punctuated overlapping rearrangements.
(D) Example of PCR validation of putative genomic rearrangement. Note the presence of alternate band in tumor material, but absence in tail DNA sample.
(E) Putative fusion of Nup214 and Abl1 kinase.
Cell 156, 1298–1311, March 13, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc.
S5

Figure S2. Acquired Mutations in mSCLC, Related to Figure 2
(A) Upper panel shows the number of silent and nonsynonymous mutations per sample. Center panel shows adequately covered Mb sequenced per sample
(minimum 8X normal control and 14X tumor coverage). Lower panel depicts the mutations/Mb of covered sequence.
(B) Cross-platform validation of mutations using whole genome and exome data sets. Bars show the number of exome mutation calls covered by WGS data. Grey
represents mutations calls not covered by at least two reads. Red are exome mutations covered by at least two reads in the WGS data that fail to identify the
variant. Green represents exome variants covered by at least two reads in which the variant is conﬁrmed by at least one read in the WGS data.
(C) Distribution of mutation signature in mSCLC. Z-axis bars represent mutation counts observed in all samples. Colored sections represent type of mutation,
divided into bars representing the three-base context of events.
(D) expanded mutation signature of the dominant mutation signatures in mSCLC.
(E) mSCLC Pten mutations mapped onto Pten polypeptide sequence.
(F) Sanger sequence traces validating acquired Pten mutations. D) Parts of whole chart showing distribution of positive, negative, and mixed Pten-positive
advanced mSCLC by IHC.
S6
Cell 156, 1298–1311, March 13, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc.

(legend on next page)
Cell 156, 1298–1311, March 13, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc.
S7

Figure S3. Pten Pathway Disruption in mSCLC, Related to Figure 3
(A) Stable expression of indicated control or Magi1 shRNAs (83 and 84) in Pten WT (left) and null (right) mSCLC cell lines: Immunoblot analysis (top panel) of total
Akt, phosphoAkt T308 and S473. Relative expression levels of Magi1 (Middle Panel) in shMagi1 treated compared to control shRNAs. Relative viability (Bottom
panel) of cells expressing Magi1 hairpins.
(B) Histological analysis of tumor spectrum of Small Cell Lung Cancer (SC), Neuroendocrine Bodies (NEB) and Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer (NS).
(C–H) Immunohistochemistry of PRPt NEBs (top) and advanced mSCLC tumors (bottom) for: Pten (C,F), pAkt-S473 (D,G), and CGRP (E,H).
(I) phospho-Histone H3 positive nuclei per mm2 and J) Cleaved Caspase-3 cells per mm2 from histologically advanced mSCLC tumors. *p < 0.05 **p < 0.01
Panels B, I, J: Mean and standard error of the mean shown.
S8
Cell 156, 1298–1311, March 13, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc.

Figure S4. Mycl1 DNA Copy Number in PRPt Tumors, Related to Figure 4
qPCR ampliﬁcation of Mycl1 in PRPt samples. Y Axis is DNA copy content normalized to normal tail DNA control (2N = tail Mycl1 DNA content). x axis shows PRPt
samples analyzed.
Cell 156, 1298–1311, March 13, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc.
S9

Figure S5. Clonal Heterogeneity in mSCLC, Related to Figure 5
(A) Violin plot of allelic fraction of all somatic mutations in primary mSCLC isolated from lungs and metastases. Low allelic fraction mutations predominate primary
tumors whereas metastases are relatively enriched for high allelic fraction events.
(B) Violin plot of cancer cell fraction (CCF) values from ABCSOLUTE in multiple primary tumors and a metastasis from a single mouse. Primary tumor T1 and
metastasis M1 share overlapping point mutations and genomic rearrangements indicating shared clonal origin. Note the increased CCF values in M1, indicating
clonal selection during metastatic seeding.
Boxes represent the median and interquartile range (IQR), and error bars extend 1.5X IQR from the boxes.
S10
Cell 156, 1298–1311, March 13, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc.
