Article
Mutational Strand Asymmetries in Cancer Genomes
Reveal Mechanisms of DNA Damage and Repair
Graphical Abstract
Highlights
d Replicative and transcriptional mutational asymmetries are
widespread across cancer
d APOBEC mutagenesis in humans primarily occurs on the
lagging-strand template
d Mismatch repair balances asymmetric replication errors
d Transcription-coupled damage (TCD) introduces sense-
strand mutations in liver cancer
Authors
Nicholas J. Haradhvala, Paz Polak,
Petar Stojanov, ..., Amnon Koren,
Michael S. Lawrence, Gad Getz
Correspondence
lawrence@broadinstitute.org (M.S.L.),
gadgetz@broadinstitute.org (G.G.)
In Brief
Using an approach that distinguishes
whether mutations in cancer genomes
occurred on the transcribed or non-
transcribed DNA strand with respect to
transcription and on the leading or
lagging strand with respect to replication,
the predominant mutational mechanisms
associated with different types of cancers
and mutational patterns can be inferred.
Haradhvala et al., 2016, Cell 164, 538–549
January 28, 2016 ª2016 Elsevier Inc.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2015.12.050

Article
Mutational Strand Asymmetries in
Cancer Genomes Reveal
Mechanisms of DNA Damage and Repair
Nicholas J. Haradhvala,1,2,8 Paz Polak,1,2,3,8 Petar Stojanov,4 Kyle R. Covington,5 Eve Shinbrot,5 Julian M. Hess,2
Esther Rheinbay,1,2 Jaegil Kim,2 Yosef E. Maruvka,1,2 Lior Z. Braunstein,2 Atanas Kamburov,1,2,3 Philip C. Hanawalt,6
David A. Wheeler,5 Amnon Koren,2,7 Michael S. Lawrence,2,9,* and Gad Getz1,2,3,9,*
1Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center and Department of Pathology, 55 Fruit Street, Boston, MA 02114, USA
2Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, 415 Main Street, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA
3Harvard Medical School, 25 Shattuck Street, Boston, MA 02115, USA
4Carnegie Mellon University School of Computer Science, 5000 Forbes Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA
5Baylor College of Medicine, 1 Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX 77030, USA
6Stanford University Department of Biology, 450 Serra Mall, Stanford, CA 94305, USA
7Cornell University Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, 526 Campus Road, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA
8Co-ﬁrst author
9Co-senior author
*Correspondence: lawrence@broadinstitute.org (M.S.L.), gadgetz@broadinstitute.org (G.G.)
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2015.12.050
SUMMARY
Mutational processes constantly shape the somatic
genome, leading to immunity, aging, cancer, and
other diseases. When cancer is the outcome, we
are afforded a glimpse into these processes by the
clonal expansion of the malignant cell. Here, we
characterize a less explored layer of the mutational
landscape of cancer: mutational asymmetries be-
tween the two DNA strands. Analyzing whole-
genome sequences of 590 tumors from 14 different
cancer types, we reveal widespread asymmetries
across mutagenic processes, with transcriptional
(‘‘T-class’’) asymmetry dominating UV-, smoking-,
and
liver-cancer-associated
mutations
and
re-
plicative (‘‘R-class’’) asymmetry dominating POLE-,
APOBEC-, and MSI-associated mutations. We report
a striking phenomenon of transcription-coupled
damage (TCD) on the non-transcribed DNA strand
and provide evidence that APOBEC mutagenesis oc-
curs on the lagging-strand template during DNA
replication. As more genomes are sequenced, study-
ing and classifying their asymmetries will illuminate
the underlying biological mechanisms of DNA dam-
age and repair.
INTRODUCTION
A thorough understanding of mutational density and patterns in
cancer genomes is important for studying the mechanisms of
mutagenesis (Pleasance et al., 2010a, 2010b), for modeling the
evolution of cancer genomes (Alexandrov et al., 2013; Nik-Zainal
et al., 2012b), and for identifying cancer genes (Lawrence et al.,
2013). In cancer genomes, somatic mutations exhibit heteroge-
neity in total mutation density, in mutation spectra among tumors
and cancer types, and in mutation density along the genome
within a given tumor (Lawrence et al., 2013; Pleasance et al.,
2010a, 2010b). This heterogeneity is caused by underlying muta-
tional processes that reﬂect different genetic backgrounds and
mutagenic exposures and by a non-uniform epigenomic land-
scape with variation in DNA replication timing, chromatin struc-
ture, and gene expression levels across the genome (Lawrence
et al., 2013; Pleasance et al., 2010a, 2010b; Polak et al., 2014,
2015; Waddell et al., 2015).
One challenge inherent in the analysis of genomic mutations is
the loss of strand information that occurs between the initial
occurrence of a mutagenic lesion and the ultimate readout by
DNA sequencing. For instance, consider a mutational process
whose initiating event is oxidative attack on the guanine of a
C:G base pair. In principle, if we isolated the DNA immediately
after such an attack, we could directly observe the lesion; how-
ever, in genomic sequencing data, we don’t encounter muta-
tions until many cell divisions later. The result of such a lesion
is generally an A:G mismatch after the ﬁrst cell division, leading
to a stable A:T base pair after an additional round of replication.
Since approximately half of C:G base pairs are oriented with the
cytosine on the reference (Watson) and half on the anti-reference
(Crick) strand, roughly equal numbers of ‘‘G/T’’ and ‘‘C/A’’
mutations are seen. A lesion at the cytosine of a C:G base pair
could produce exactly the same result, so working backward,
we cannot determine the base of the original DNA damage.
This is because using the genomic reference strand as the
‘‘frame of reference’’ for base-pair orientation is merely an arbi-
trary convention.
However, we can recover some strand information by consid-
ering a more biologically meaningful reference frame. In regions
that undergo DNA transcription, the DNA can be oriented with
respect to the transcribed strand. Thus, we would consider a
C:G/A:T base pair change to be a ‘‘C/A’’ or ‘‘G/T’’ mutation
538
Cell 164, 538–549, January 28, 2016 ª2016 Elsevier Inc.

depending on whether the C or the G is in the template strand for
transcription. Alternatively, we can use DNA replication to deﬁne
a frame of reference. In this case, whether the C of a C:G base
pair is on the leading or the lagging strand of DNA replication
would determine the type of mutation. Because replication and
transcription are each associated with opportunities for the
asymmetric (strand-speciﬁc) introduction and repair of DNA
damage, they each have the potential to leave their footprints
in a patient’s mutational proﬁle in the form of unequal rates
and patterns of mutations on the two strands of DNA (Francioli
et al., 2015; Green et al., 2003; Lobry, 1996; Lujan et al., 2012;
Pleasance et al., 2010a, 2010b; Polak and Arndt, 2008; Polak
et al., 2010; Shinbrot et al., 2014; Touchon et al., 2005).
Strand asymmetry has already been well studied in the context
of transcription. DNA lesions encountered on the transcribed
(‘‘template’’) strand can stall progression of the RNA polymer-
ase, leading to the recruitment of a nucleotide excision repair
(NER) complex that can correct the damage (Donahue et al.,
1994; Fousteri and Mullenders, 2008; Hanawalt and Spivak,
2008; Jiang and Sancar, 2006; Mellon et al., 1987; Spivak and
Ganesan, 2014). Importantly, higher transcription levels of a
gene are associated with more opportunities for transcription-
coupled repair (TCR), leading to an inverse correlation between
the expression level of a gene and its mutation density (Chapman
et al., 2011; Lawrence et al., 2013; Pleasance et al., 2010a).
Conversely, damage on the non-template (‘‘sense’’) strand
may fail to stall the RNA polymerase and therefore could escape
repair by TCR. In addition, the non-template strand remains sin-
gle-stranded during the process of transcription and is therefore
more vulnerable to damage (Jinks-Robertson and Bhagwat,
2014). In combination, these mechanisms lead to differences in
mutation densities and spectra on the transcribed and non-tran-
scribed strands (Pleasance et al., 2010a, 2010b). Notably, tran-
scriptional strand asymmetry provides information regarding
damage and TCR beyond what can be gathered from the corre-
lation of mutational densities with expression, since the latter is
convolved with other genomic factors such as chromatin-state-
and replication-timing-dependent mismatch repair (MMR; Su-
pek and Lehner, 2015).
Strand asymmetry can also be viewed in the reference frame
of DNA replication. The DNA replication fork is composed of a
leading strand, copied in a largely continuous fashion, and a lag-
ging strand, copied as a discontinuous series of Okazaki frag-
ments. DNA polymerases a, d, and ε work together to replicate
the DNA but have distinct roles in synthesis and proofreading.
The resulting asymmetry reﬂects an imbalance in the types of
mutations introduced on the leading versus lagging strand,
although it is still a matter of debate whether this occurs due to
the division of labor of distinct polymerases in DNA synthesis
(Miyabe et al., 2011; Nick McElhinny et al., 2008) or due to
specialized
polymerase
proofreading
properties
(Johnson
et al., 2015; Stillman, 2015). Additionally the lagging strand en-
dures longer exposure as single-stranded DNA (ssDNA; Yu
et al., 2014) and, as such, may be more vulnerable to ssDNA-tar-
geting mutagens. These factors lead to replication-associated
mutational asymmetry that ﬂips (i.e., inverts which strand has
the higher mutation density) at replication origins. Replication-
strand asymmetries were observed as local skews in nucleotide
composition in the chromosomes of bacterial (Lobry, 1996;
McLean et al., 1998) and eukaryotic (Touchon et al., 2005) spe-
cies, are associated with robustly programmed yeast replication
origins (Koren et al., 2010), and have also been experimentally
demonstrated in yeast (Lujan et al., 2012; Pavlov et al., 2002).
RESULTS
A Framework for Analysis of Replicative and
Transcriptional Asymmetries
We partitioned the human genome in two ways: ﬁrst, by tran-
scription direction, using RefSeq gene deﬁnitions (Figure 1A).
We annotated genomic regions as tx(+) when they encoded
genes on the reference strand and as tx() when they encoded
genes on the complementary strand. We considered the pat-
terns
of
mutations
in
smoking-associated
lung
cancers,
combining mutation data from seven lung adenocarcinomas
(LUAD) that exhibited a strong smoking signature. Mutational
densities of C:G/A:T are highest in both tx(+) and tx() genes
when the guanine is on the non-transcribed strand (Figure 1C).
This is consistent with the known mechanism of the smoking
signature, driven by carcinogen attack at guanines (Denissenko
et al., 1996). TCR lowers the mutational densities of C:G base
pairs in which the guanine serves as the transcription template
(denoted Cntx:Gtx), relative to intergenic regions (IGR). In
contrast, Gntx:Ctx base pairs do not beneﬁt from this extra oppor-
tunity for repair, resulting in undiminished mutation density of
Gntx:Ctx/Tntx:Atx, as shown previously (Pleasance et al.,
2010b).
The second form of genome partitioning was by DNA replica-
tion direction. Since the entire genome is replicated every time a
cell divides (but only a portion is transcribed), replication direc-
tion has the potential to exert larger asymmetries in mutational
data. However, determining direction is much more challenging
for replication than transcription, since the precise locations of
replication origins in the human genome are not known. This
has precluded a comprehensive analysis of replicative strand
asymmetry thus far.
To enable an analysis of replication direction and strand asym-
metry, we utilized high-resolution genomic replication timing
data from deep DNA sequencing of S- and G1-phase cells
from lymphoblastoid cell lines of six individuals (Koren et al.,
2012). These data exhibit valleys and peaks in a timing-versus-
location landscape that correspond to the approximate locations
of replication origins (or origin clusters) and replication termini
(Figure 1B). The regions between valleys and peaks correspond,
in principle, to regions that replicate predominantly in a single di-
rection (from origin to termination zone) and for which predomi-
nant replication direction can be assigned. This approach has
previously been used to reveal compositional skews and asym-
metric evolutionary germline mutations in the human genome
(Chen et al., 2011). However, there are inherent limitations in
the identiﬁcation of replication origins based on replication
timing valleys, and there is a lack of a gold standard (i.e., a set
of replication origins with known locations) with which to bench-
mark this approach.
The valleys and peaks (constant-timing regions) are the source
of most tissue-speciﬁc variation in the proﬁles (Rhind and
Cell 164, 538–549, January 28, 2016 ª2016 Elsevier Inc.
539

Gilbert, 2013; Ryba et al., 2010) and, furthermore, present no
clear direction of replication. Therefore, we excluded these re-
gions from our analysis and focused on ‘‘timing transition re-
gions’’ (TTRs), which are highly conserved (Rhind and Gilbert,
2013; Ryba et al., 2010) and have a prominent slope that indi-
cates the general direction of replication, either ‘‘left-replicating’’
A
E
F
POLE / Replication
Smoking Asymmetry
POLE Asymmetry
Lung Smoking / Transcription
C
D
−1
0
1
Log2 Ratio
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Mutations/Mb
Entire Genome
Tx(+) Genes
Tx(-) Genes
−1
0
1
Log2 Ratio
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
Entire Genome
Left-Replicating
Right-Replicating
Mutations/Mb
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
200
600
1000
34.5
35
35.5
36
36.5
37
400
600
800
1000
−1
−0.5
0
0.5
1
all
Entire genome left−replicating right−replicating
−1
−0.5
0
0.5
1
tx(+)
−1
−0.5
0
0.5
1
tx(−)
Transcription Direction
Tx(-)
Reference
3’
3’
5’
RNA 
Polymerase
RNA 
Polymerase
Tx(+)
TSS
TSS
5’
C>A/G>T
C>G/G>C
C>T/G>A
A>C/T>G
C>A/G>T
C>T/G>A
A>C/T>G
A>G/T>C
A>T/T>A
C>A/G>T
C>G/G>C
C>T/G>A
A>C/T>G
A>G/T>C
A>T/T>A
C>A/G>T
C>G/G>C
C>T/G>A
Log2 Ratio
Log2 Ratio
ANKRD16
FBXO18
5.9
5.92
5.94
Chromosome 10 Position (Mb)
5
5.4
5.8
6.2
6.6
x y
Log2(   )
x
y
B
late
early
Replication Timing
Chromosome 10 Position (Mb)
Replication Direction
Predominately Right-Replicating
5’
3’
Pol-lead
Pol-lag
Predominantly Left-Replicating
5’
3’
Pol-lead
Pol-lag
Right-Replicating
Left-Replicating
−1
−0.5
0
0.5
1
all
Entire genome
left−replicating right−replicating
−1
−0.5
0
0.5
1
tx(+)
−1
−0.5
0
0.5
1
tx(−)
Figure 1. Mutational Strand Asymmetry Associated with Transcription and Replication
Transcription is shown on the left and replication on the right.
(A) Transcription direction: Tx(+) regions carry the coding sequence of a gene on the genomic reference strand, and Tx() regions carry the coding sequence on
the genomic complement strand.
(B) Replication direction: positive slope in replication timing data indicates general rightward movement of the replication complex (‘‘right-replicating’’), while
negative slope indicates left-replicating.
(C) Lung cancers show strong transcriptional (‘‘T-class’’) asymmetry. Each pair of bars (upper axis) shows the density of mutations at C:G (left bar) and G:C (right
bar) base pairs. When summing across the entire genome, base-pair orientation does not affect mutational densities. In tx(+) regions, G:C base pairs show a
higher density of G/T transversions than C:G base pairs; the opposite is true in tx() regions. Lower axis shows the log2 ratio of each pair of bars.
(D) POLE mutant cancers (colorectal and endometrial) show strong replicative (‘‘R-class’’) asymmetry. Left-replicating regions show a higher density of mutations
at C:G base pairs, and right-replicating regions show a higher density at G:C.
(E) Lung cancers show strong T-class asymmetry but little R-class.
(F) POLE mutant cancers show strong R-class strand asymmetry but little T-class.
Error bars represent 95% conﬁdence interval.
540
Cell 164, 538–549, January 28, 2016 ª2016 Elsevier Inc.

or ‘‘right-replicating.’’ (We use the terms ‘‘left’’ and ‘‘right’’ when
viewing the DNA in the standard orientation.) While TTRs were
ﬁrst thought to represent regions that are entirely uni-directional
in replication (Ryba et al., 2010), it was later suggested that the
vast majority of these regions are replicated too quickly for a sin-
gle replication fork and are more likely replicated by origins that
ﬁre in close succession (Guilbaud et al., 2011; Rhind and Gilbert,
2013). For any pair of sequentially ﬁring origins, the greater
portion of the inter-origin distance is replicated by the fork orig-
inating from the earlier of the two origins. The result is that, in
aggregate, the larger portion of a TTR is synthesized in the
early-to-late direction (Figure S1). Thus, TTRs have a predomi-
nant replication direction given by the sign of their slope.
Restricting analysis to these regions enabled us to assign the
predominant replication direction to 38% of the genome.
To validate our ability to measure replicative asymmetry using
these left- and right-replicating deﬁnitions, we considered the
one known case of replicative mutational asymmetry: tumors
carrying functional mutations in the proofreading exonuclease
domain of POLE, the gene encoding polymerase ε (designated
as ‘‘POLE tumors’’; Shinbrot et al., 2014). The exonuclease
domain of polymerase ε is responsible for proofreading during
synthesis of the leading strand (Nick McElhinny et al., 2008; Shin-
brot et al., 2014), and POLE tumors were previously reported to
have high rates of C:G mutations (to A:T or T:A) asymmetrically
introduced at cytosines replicated on the leading-strand tem-
plate near three well-characterized origins of replication (Shin-
brot et al., 2014). As a consequence, in these tumors we would
expect to see predominantly C/A mutations in left-replicating
regions and G/T in right-replicating regions, since we hypoth-
esized these regions to be enriched for leading- and lagging-
strand synthesis of the reference strand, respectively.
Indeed, when asymmetry is visualized along the chromosome,
asymmetric C:G/A:T mutations, in a pooled cohort of 12
mutant-POLE colorectal and endometrial tumors, correspond
strikingly to the slope of the replication timing proﬁle (Figure 2).
Higher densities of C/A mutations occur in regions of negative
slope, while higher G/T densities occur in regions of positive
slope. In TTRs (see Experimental Procedures), the magnitude
and direction of this imbalance correlates well with the slope of
the proﬁle (R2 = 0.53), while in constant-timing regions, no
such correlation exists (R2 = 0.08). Comparing left- and right-
replicating regions, we measured a near 2-fold enrichment for
the expected mutation type (Figure 1D). This is consistent with
the recently reported preference for mutations at C:G base pairs
where the cytosine is on the leading template strand measured
next to three well-localized origins of replication (we will denote
such base pairs Clft:Grt) (Shinbrot et al., 2014), and this validates
our ability to extract replication direction from replication timing
proﬁles. Furthermore, we tested our method on replication
timing datasets from various cell types, including embryonic
stem cells, induced pluripotent stem cells, neural precursor cells,
and lymphoblast cell lines (Figure S2) (Ryba et al., 2010). All
yielded very similar patterns of asymmetry, demonstrating the
robustness of our method to tissue-speciﬁc variations in replica-
tion timing proﬁles.
Having analyzed each reference frame separately, we jointly
considered transcriptional (T-class) and replicative (R-class)
asymmetry. By focusing the analysis on regions that are both
transcribed and located in TTRs, we can control for potential
confounding factors such as chromatin state, since transcribed
regions are typically in open chromatin and TTRs often reside
at boundaries between open and closed chromatin (Lawrence
et al., 2013). Surprisingly, we observed near-complete mutual
exclusivity of R- and T-class asymmetries in the smoking-asso-
ciated (lung) and POLE-associated (colorectal, endometrial)
cohorts. In smoking-associated genomes, the direction of muta-
tional asymmetries ﬂips with transcription direction but shows lit-
tle dependence on replication direction, even when controlling
for transcription direction (Figure 1E). These observations show
that smoking-associated lung cancers have a mutational pattern
dominated by T-class asymmetry and with very little contribution
from R-class asymmetry.
The opposite pattern was seen in POLE-associated cancers,
in which mutational asymmetries depended entirely on replica-
tion direction and showed little response to change in transcrip-
tion direction (Figure 1F). Thus, POLE-associated cancers have a
mutational pattern dominated by R-class asymmetry and with
almost zero T-class asymmetry.
The Asymmetry Map of Cancer Genomics
Having
established
that
we
can
observe
and
separate
transcriptional and replicative strand asymmetries for two
well-understood
mutational
processes,
we
performed
a
comprehensive analysis of mutational strand asymmetries
across many tumor types. We analyzed somatic mutations in
590 whole-genome sequences across 14 tumor types, parti-
tioned into 18 patient cohorts (separating out POLE and micro-
satellite-instability [MSI] cases in the colorectal and endometrial
cohorts and separating smokers from non-smokers in the two
Figure 2. Strand Asymmetry in POLE Mutant Cancers Reﬂects
Directionality of DNA Replication TTRs
Replication timing proﬁles are shown for the p arms (up to 60 Mb) of the ﬁrst ten
chromosomes. Proﬁles are colored by the local ratio of C/A to G/T muta-
tions in a cohort of 12 mutant-POLE genomes (colorectal and endometrial).
Strikingly, late-to-early TTRs (where slope is negative) frequently have a strong
bias toward C/A mutations (blue), consistent with leading-strand synthesis
using the reference strand as template. Conversely, early-to-late TTRs (posi-
tive slopes) show bias toward G/T mutations (red), consistent with lagging-
strand synthesis using the reference strand as template (Shinbrot et al., 2014).
Cell 164, 538–549, January 28, 2016 ª2016 Elsevier Inc.
541

lung cohorts; Table S1). For each cohort, we identiﬁed the
mutation type having the largest asymmetry, with respect to
transcription and to replication (Figure 3). This revealed a con-
tinuum of tumor types, ranging from tumors with predominant
transcriptional (T-class) asymmetry to those with predominant
replicative (R-class) asymmetry. For example, the melanoma,
liver, and lung cohorts fell on the T-class side of the spectrum,
while tumors frequently associated with an APOBEC signature
(BLCA, BRCA, and HNSC) or MSI (CRC-MSI) showed R-class
asymmetries at levels comparable to those of POLE tumors
(CRC-POLE and UCEC-POLE).
The genomic asymmetry proﬁles of R-class tumors are
strikingly concordant among each other within TTRs (POLE-
APOBEC R2 = 0.50, POLE-MSI R2 = 0.66, APOBEC-MSI
R2 = 0.42) as well as with the slope of the replication timing
proﬁle (POLE R2 = 0.56, APOBEC R2 = 0.47, MSI R2 = 0.49)
(Figure 4), a trend robust to substituting replication timing pro-
ﬁles from various cell types (Ryba et al., 2010) (Figures S3 and
S4). Importantly, we were able to detect statistically signiﬁcant
levels of asymmetry in all cohorts in at least one mutation type,
and 8/15 showed either T-class or R-class asymmetry with
greater than 50% enrichment (>0.58 in Figure 3) for at least
one mutation type. Overall, these results demonstrate that
mutational strand asymmetries are widespread across cancer.
Trends in Mutational Asymmetries
Next, we explored how mutational asymmetries depend on other
variables such as expression levels, replication timing, and dis-
tance from transitions in replication or transcription direction.
We focused on mutational processes that we identiﬁed as being
the chief sources of asymmetry and identiﬁed the samples in
which these processes were the major contributor to the overall
mutational burden (Table S2). First, we analyzed transcriptional
asymmetry as a function of gene expression level and replicative
asymmetry as a function of DNA replication timing (Experimental
Procedures). For most processes, we observed a decrease in
Figure
3. Cancer
Cohorts
Vary
Widely
across the Asymmetry Map
For each cohort listed, the maximal replicative
asymmetry (x axis) and the maximal transcriptional
asymmetry (y axis) were measured and plotted.
Gray ellipses denote 95% conﬁdence intervals for
cohorts in which these extend beyond the bounds
of the plot symbols.
mutational burden at higher expression
levels (Figure 5A). Transcriptional asym-
metry, which reﬂects TCR activity, was
seen in a subset of these cohorts (liver
A/G, smoking C/A, and UV C/T)
and was maximal in highly expressed
regions. In other cohorts (e.g., POLE
C/A,
microsatellite
stable
cancers
[MSS] C/T), no transcriptional asymme-
try was seen, perhaps due to the fact that
other
covariates
(such
as
replication
timing and chromatin state) correlate
with expression levels but affect mutational burden via repair
mechanisms that are independent of transcription. Similarly,
for most processes, we observed a decrease in mutational
burden in earliest-replicating regions (Figure 5B). Replicative
asymmetry was seen in a subset of cohorts (MSI, APOBEC,
POLE) and was strongest in earliest-replicating regions (espe-
cially in the case of POLE) but absent in other cohorts. To control
for differences in chromatin state of TTRs and transcribed re-
gions, in all of these cohorts we again performed a joint analysis
of T- and R-class asymmetries (Figure S5).
We also analyzed the effect of genomic position with respect
to transitions in transcription or replication direction. We
examined transcriptional asymmetry around minus-to-plus
transcription-direction transitions (Figure 5C), typically repre-
senting bidirectional promoters (Trinklein et al., 2004), and
replicative asymmetry around left-to-right replication-direction
transitions (Figure 5D), i.e., replication timing minima (Experi-
mental Procedures). Mutations associated with smoking, UV,
and liver cancer showed transcriptional strand asymmetries
that ﬂipped sign at transitions in transcription direction. Other
cancers maintained balanced mutation densities on both sides
of these transitions. Conversely, mutations associated with
POLE, MSI, and APOBEC showed replicative strand asymme-
tries that ﬂipped sign at replication timing minima. Other
cohorts showed no such behavior at changes in replication di-
rection. Exploring each of these asymmetries further can shed
light on the operational mechanisms of mutagenesis and repair
in these tumors.
Mutational Asymmetries Reveal Mechanisms of
Mutagenesis
The above analyses led to insights into the mechanisms of
incompletely understood mutational processes, such as the
APOBEC and liver signatures. The APOBEC signature consists
of C/G and C/T mutations in the context TCW (W = A or T)
and is thought to reﬂect the activity of APOBEC-family cytidine
542
Cell 164, 538–549, January 28, 2016 ª2016 Elsevier Inc.

deaminase enzymes (Alexandrov et al., 2013; Lawrence et al.,
2013; Roberts et al., 2013). While the precise details of this phe-
nomenon in cancer are not completely understood, a large body
of work has characterized many aspects of this form of mutagen-
esis. APOBEC enzymes target ssDNA (Conticello, 2012), cause
mutation clusters termed kataegis (Nik-Zainal et al., 2012a),
and do not cause the usual increase in mutational densities in
late-replicating, open-chromatin, and highly expressed regions
(Kazanov et al., 2015). The main occurrences of ssDNA in human
cells have been speculated to be at double-strand breaks
(DSBs), R loops in transcription bubbles, and the lagging strand
of the DNA replication fork. Experiments in model organisms
have shown that APOBEC enzymes are indeed capable of
inducing mutagenesis at DSBs (Taylor et al., 2013) and transcrip-
tion bubbles (Lada et al., 2015; Taylor et al., 2014).
Our results suggest that, in humans, APOBEC mutagenesis
primarily occurs on the lagging-strand template during DNA
replication. The APOBEC signature shows strong R-class asym-
metry, with a higher rate of C/G and C/T mutations in right-
replicating regions (Figures 3 and 5), where reference-strand
DNA is predicted to be replicated as the lagging-strand tem-
plate, exposed as ssDNA between Okazaki segments. The
magnitude of this asymmetry increases with enrichment of the
APOBEC signature (Figure 6A), and joint analysis of both classes
of asymmetry placed APOBEC squarely at the R-class end of the
spectrum (Figure 6B). Note that, in all breast, bladder, and head
and neck samples, even when the fraction of APOBEC mutations
is low, signiﬁcant R-class asymmetry is observed, suggesting
that it is not merely a property of hypermutation. These ﬁndings
are further supported by research in model organisms concur-
rent with this study. Bhagwat et al. (2016) found that overexpres-
sion of APOBEC3G in E. coli leads to a C:G/T:A signature that
shows a replicative strand bias consistent with cytosine deami-
nation of the lagging-strand template. Additionally, in a yeast
model, Roberts and colleagues (Hoopes et al., 2016) showed
that overexpression of APOBEC3A and B produces a similar
replicative asymmetry.
Taken together, these ﬁndings suggest that the R-class
model is the primary mechanism for APOBEC mutagenesis in
humans. In this model, APOBEC-family enzymes deaminate cy-
tosines on the lagging-strand template during DNA replication,
likely while it is single stranded (Figure 6C). The resulting uracil
is excised, and subsequent replication either incorporates an
adenine across from this abasic site, resulting in a C/T muta-
tion, or (mediated by REV1 activity) incorporates a cytosine, re-
sulting in a C/G mutation (Helleday et al., 2014). This model is
also supported by the unusual lack of increase in mutational
densities in late-replicating regions (Figure 5) (Kazanov et al.,
2015). As MMR has been suggested to underlie this variation
in mutational densities (Supek and Lehner, 2015), this may
imply
that
APOBEC-associated
mutagenesis
evades
the
MMR machinery. This is consistent with the R-class model, in
which the lagging-strand template (i.e., the parental strand) is
deaminated; MMR, which relies on the parental strand to cor-
rect mistakes on the nascent strand, would be unable to cor-
rect this error without a correct template. Genome-wide, we
observed only a small amount of APOBEC T-class asymmetry
(Figure 6C), but a previous report showed that overexpressing
APOBEC in yeast resulted in mutations that were transcription-
ally asymmetric (Lada et al., 2015). Indeed, when we restricted
to 50 UTRs (the regions reported to have the strongest tran-
scriptional asymmetry), we revealed APOBEC T-class asymme-
try also in humans (Figure S6). However, in the genome-wide
analysis, the T-class asymmetry is dwarfed by the contributions
from the R-class model.
Intriguingly, we observed a similar APOBEC mutational
R-class asymmetry in the human germline. We measured repli-
cative asymmetry in a set of 11,020 de novo germline muta-
tions (Francioli et al., 2015) and found that C/G and C/T
mutations showed no signiﬁcant R-class asymmetry outside
of the TCW context (1127 C/G/T versus 1171 G/A/C, in
the leading-strand reference frame, p = 0.35). When we
focused on the TCW context (the preferred target of APOBEC
mutagenesis), we were able to detect a signiﬁcant level of
R-class asymmetry (109 TCW/G/T versus 151 WGA/A/C
mutations, in the leading-strand reference frame, p = 0.014;
Figure S7). Further studies analyzing a larger number of muta-
tions will be required to fully understand the potential impact of
APOBEC enzymes on germline mutagenesis and its evolu-
tionary implications.
A Mechanism of Transcription-Coupled DNA Damage
In contrast to APOBEC- and MSI-associated mutations, liver
A:T/G:C mutations showed little replicative asymmetry but
instead showed transcriptional asymmetry similar to that seen
in lung cancer (LUSC and LUAD in Figure 3; smoking C/A
versus G/T in Figure 5). Closer inspection of transcriptional
strand asymmetry revealed a distinction between the liver
A/G signature and the two other T-class examples: UV-associ-
ated C/T and smoking-associated G/T. Mutations generated
by UV light and smoking are lower in density on the transcribed
Figure 4. Replicative Asymmetry Is Concordant across Three
Distinct R-Class Mutational Processes
Color representing mutational asymmetry is overlaid on replication timing
proﬁles as in Figure 2. Proﬁles are shown in triplets colored by: (1) C/A:G/T
asymmetry
in 12 mutant-POLE
colorectal
and
endometrial
genomes,
(2) G/C:C/G asymmetry in 22 APOBEC-enriched bladder, breast, and
head-and-neck genomes, and (3) A/G:T/C asymmetry in 9 MSI-associated
colon genomes.
Cell 164, 538–549, January 28, 2016 ª2016 Elsevier Inc.
543

strand compared to proximal IGR (due to TCR), while mutational
densities on the non-transcribed strand remain constant regard-
less of transcription (Figure 7A). The liver A/G signature also
shows the expected TCR effect on the transcribed strand; how-
ever, mutational densities of A/G on the non-transcribed
strand drastically increase in transcribed regions. This suggests
that transcriptional asymmetry in liver is not only due to repair of
the transcribed strand but is also compounded by damage to the
complementary non-transcribed strand, a phenomenon we call
transcription-coupled damage (TCD).
At the extreme, we observed one liver cancer sample, HX17T,
which showed a 3-fold transcription-dependent increase in
A/G mutational densities on the non-transcribed strand (Fig-
ure 7B). This is in contrast to the usual trend in which non-tran-
scribed strand mutational densities decrease with expression
due to more effective global genome repair (GGR) and MMR in
open-chromatin and early-replicating regions. This effect is
unique to the A/G signature. In that same sample, C/A muta-
tional densities (driven by carcinogen attack ;Alexandrov et al.,
2013) showed the usual decrease on both strands (Figure 7C).
In our cohort of 88 liver cancer samples, we examined the slope
of this response of mutational density to expression level for
each of the 12 possible mutation types (Figure 7D). In a two-
tailed test, we found that 25/88 of the liver patients showed a
signiﬁcant increase in A/G mutational densities on the non-
A
B
C
D
Figure 5. Trends and Flips in Asymmetry
(A) Transcriptional strand asymmetry measured
across four quartiles of expression levels. Total
mutation density tends to decrease with expres-
sion level, and T-class asymmetry (liver, smoking,
UV) is maximal at highest expression.
(B)
Replicative
strand
asymmetry
measured
across four quartiles of replication timing. Total
mutational density tends to decrease with earlier
replication,
and
R-class
asymmetry
(MSI,
APOBEC, POLE) is maximal at earliest replication.
(C) Strand-speciﬁc mutational density measured in
the vicinity of bidirectional promoters. T-class
asymmetry ﬂips at transitions from tx() to tx(+)
regions.
(D) Strand-speciﬁc mutational density measured in
the vicinity of replication timing minima. R-class
asymmetry ﬂips at these left-to-right transitions.
Error bars represent 95% conﬁdence intervals.
transcribed strand (Experimental Proce-
dures), while only 9/88 showed a signiﬁ-
cant decrease, showing that, in the
majority of samples, the A/G signature
does not show the usual repair (Table
S3). As mentioned before, the contribu-
tions of MMR and GGR are confounding
factors when considering the effect of
expression levels on mutational densities,
since higher expression is correlated with
earlier replication timing and a more open
chromatin state. As a result, on the non-
transcribed
strand,
higher
expression
could lead to both increased damage by TCD and higher levels
of repair by MMR and GGR. Different contributions of these
damage and repair processes likely underlie the variation that
we observed across patients.
While the strong transcriptional asymmetry of the A/G signa-
ture in liver cancer has been noted (Alexandrov et al., 2013), we
propose that this is due to two separate processes operating on
different strands—TCD and TCR (Figure 7E). This explains the
extreme transcriptional asymmetry of liver A/G compared to
other signatures (Figure 3). Furthermore these results suggest
that the A/G signature is caused by a mutational process
distinct from typical bulky-adduct damage. Finally, we noticed
that one colorectal patient (‘‘CRC-8’’) from an earlier study of
nine colorectal whole genomes (Bass et al., 2011) showed the
same signature of TCD. Thus, this phenomenon may be enriched
in liver but not exclusive to it.
Mismatch Repair Balances Mutational Asymmetry
Colorectal cancers with functional MMR (i.e., MSS) show little
replicative asymmetry of any mutation type (aside from C/G
mutations, which are in part due to low levels of APOBEC signa-
ture). As mentioned above, loss of functional polymerase ε proof-
reading results in R-class asymmetry. MSI colorectal tumors,
typically resulting from damage to the MMR system (Kane
et al., 1997; Shinbrot et al., 2014; Vilar and Gruber, 2010), also
544
Cell 164, 538–549, January 28, 2016 ª2016 Elsevier Inc.

show replicative asymmetry (Figure 6D). This would suggest that
MMR (in addition to exonuclease proofreading) is required to
balance mutational asymmetries generated during DNA replica-
tion. This phenomenon has also been reported in yeast (Lujan
et al., 2012), and our results suggest that the same is true in
humans.
The implications of this role for MMR reach beyond the
realm of cancer research. Without such balancing, asymmetric
introduction of germline mutations would result in local deple-
tion of speciﬁc nucleotides over evolution. Indeed, a slight
replicative
imbalance
can
be
detected
in
the
reference
genome: Clft:Grt base pairs outnumber Glft:Crt base pairs by
2.1% on average, and Alft:Trt base pairs outnumber Tlft:Art
base pairs by 3.7%. This is in line with a previous result
measuring a mean compositional skew of 3.72% (Chen
et al., 2011). However, the relative mildness of these imbal-
ances, compared to the much stronger mutational asymme-
tries seen in MMR-deﬁcient tumors, suggests that MMR has
played an important role throughout evolution in maintaining
genome symmetry.
DISCUSSION
Our
results
highlight
the
widespread
mutational
strand
asymmetries observed in cancer genomes, mediated by DNA
replication, RNA transcription, and their associated repair path-
ways. Study of these prominent sources of asymmetry has
mostly been performed in model organisms (Lobry, 1996; Lujan
et al., 2012; McLean et al., 1998; Pavlov et al., 2002; Touchon
et al., 2005), and here, we extend this analysis to humans via
cancer genomics. Our work addresses several of the most
prominent processes in cancer and provides insight into their
biological mechanisms. Analysis of asymmetries associated
with the growing number of mutational processes discovered
by sophisticated signature decoupling approaches (Alexandrov
et al., 2013; Kasar et al., 2015; Lawrence et al., 2013) will pro-
vide a deeper view of these processes and will further illumi-
nate their underlying sources. Our ability to detect mutational
asymmetries will improve with higher-resolution replication
timing and transcription maps and with improving knowledge
of human replication origins. Finally, we note that there may
A
B
C
D
Figure 6. R-Class Asymmetries Associated with APOBEC and MSI
(A) Bladder, breast, and head-and-neck cohorts. Samples with highest enrichment of APOBEC signature show highest replicative asymmetry of C/G mutations.
(B) APOBEC-enriched samples are dominated by replicative asymmetry (as in Figures 1E and 1F)
(C) Proposed model: APOBEC deaminates cytosine to uracil on the ssDNA of the lagging-strand template during DNA replication.
(D) R-class asymmetry in MSS, MSI, and POLE mutant cohorts. MSS samples have little asymmetry. Loss of MMR or pol ε proofreading leads to imbalance in
mutations between the leading and lagging strands.
Error bars represent 95% conﬁdence interval.
Cell 164, 538–549, January 28, 2016 ª2016 Elsevier Inc.
545

be additional useful reference frames for symmetry breaking
beyond the two used here.
Classifying patients according to their patterns of mutational
strand asymmetry may have clinical relevance. Tumors with
defects in DNA repair mechanisms have been shown to be
vulnerable to synthetically lethal therapeutic interventions that
further disrupt genome stability (Carreras Puigvert et al.,
2015; Curtin, 2012; Middleton et al., 2015). As discussed,
R-class asymmetries can be introduced either by asymmetric
damage at the replication fork or by deﬁciency in the proof-
reading and repair of DNA synthesis. In the latter case, R-class
asymmetry may serve as a proxy for replicative stress and
could suggest synthetic lethality as an effective avenue for
treatment. Similarly, individual patients of T-class tumor types
(such as melanoma) that do not themselves exhibit T-class
asymmetry potentially reveal a deﬁciency of TCR. Thus,
analyzing asymmetries of both classes may facilitate a better
match between patients and treatments.
Additionally, patient-speciﬁc responses to classic chemo-
therapy drugs are often poorly understood and are difﬁcult to
predict. Analyzing responses to these drugs in conjunction
with mutation rates and asymmetries at the replication fork or
transcription bubble may provide useful insights into these
drugs’ functionality. This, in turn, could allow for more targeted
use of the drugs, as well as better control of unintended side
effects.
Strand asymmetry may be particularly impactful in the earliest
driving events of cancer, due to that deﬁning feature of carcino-
genesis, the transformation of cells into an aberrantly prolifera-
tive state. A particular DNA lesion may push the cell from a
resting state (without DNA replication) into active mitosis, and
the initial strand hit by that driver lesion is crucial; due to absent
(or infrequent DNA) replication in these pre-malignant cells, DNA
damage of the non-transcribed strand may wait a very long time
to be propagated as a mutation to the transcribed strand where it
can exert its driving effect. We also note that the strand asymme-
tries we observe in cancer may inform the debate on the
‘‘immortal DNA strand hypothesis’’ and its possible relevance
to cancer (Cairns, 2006; Yadlapalli and Yamashita, 2013; Toma-
setti and Bozic, 2015).
A
B
D
E
C
Figure 7. Transcription-Coupled Damage in Liver Cancer
(A) Mutational densities in the vicinity of promoters. When crossing from non-transcribed intergenic regions (IGR) to transcribed regions, mutational densities on
the transcribed strand fall, reﬂecting TCR. On the non-transcribed strand there is usually little change from IGR levels, with the notable exception of liver cancer, in
which mutational densities increase from IGR levels, consistent with transcription-coupled damage (TCD).
(B) Liver cancer patient HX17T shows a dramatic expression-dependent increase in A/G mutational densities on the non-transcribed strand only.
(C) In the same patient, G/T mutational densities show only the usual expression-dependent decrease on both strands.
(D) Most liver patients show dominant TCR. However, for A/G mutations on the non-transcribed strand (green dots), some show the opposite trend, reﬂecting
dominant TCD. The leftmost dot is patient HX17T.
(E) TCD damages the non-transcribed strand, exposed as ssDNA during transcription. TCR repairs the transcribed strand. Both of these processes contribute to
T-class asymmetry.
Error bars represent 95% conﬁdence interval.
546
Cell 164, 538–549, January 28, 2016 ª2016 Elsevier Inc.

Beyond cancer, somatic mutational processes play an
important role in a broad range of diseases, including aging
(Kennedy et al., 2012; Kenyon, 2010), autoimmune disease
(Ross, 2014), and neurological disorders (Poduri et al., 2013).
Many of the same background mutational processes are active
in cancerous and non-cancerous cells (such as methylated
CpG deamination/‘‘aging,’’ UV damage, and environmental mu-
tagens), and the lessons learned from the clonal expansion of
mutations in cancer will aid in the understanding of these uni-
versal processes. Novel mutational and repair processes
continue to emerge from cancer genome sequencing studies,
and viewing them through the lens of mutational strand asym-
metry can provide immediate insights into their molecular
mechanisms.
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Data Provenance
We assembled a collection of 590 whole-genome sequences from 14 tumor
types by combining published data from the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA;
dbGAP: phs000178.v1.p1) with other published datasets (Alexandrov et al.,
2013; Dulak et al., 2013; Lawrence et al., 2014; Bass et al., 2011; Berger
et al., 2012; Wang et al., 2011).
Statistical Analysis
MATLAB code to generate asymmetry metrics and ﬁgures is available at www.
broadinstitute.org/cancer/cga/AsymTools.
Determining Transcription and Replication Direction and
Calculating Densities
Transcription direction was determined according to the Refseq database.
Replication direction was deﬁned using replication timing proﬁles generated
in six lymphoblastoid cell lines, as published in Koren et al. (2012). We deter-
mined left- and right-replicating regions based on the sign of the derivative of
the proﬁle (negative is left-replicating and positive is right-replicating). To only
deﬁne regions in TTRs, we required a slope with a magnitude of at least 250
replication timing units (‘‘rtu’’) per Mb. These arbitrary units range from 100
to 1,200, denoting the beginning and end of S phase.
Mutational densities for a given base pair change b1:b2/m1:m2 and its
complementary mutation b2:b1/m2:m1 in a given list of regions were deter-
mined by the formula:
rb1:b2/m1:m2 = nb1/m1
p  Nb1
rb2:b1/m2:m1 = nb2/m2
p  Nb2
where nb/m is the number of observations of b/m mutations with respect
to the genomic reference strand, Nb is the number of chances for this muta-
tion to happen, i.e., the number of occurrences of the motif b in the given re-
gion of the reference genome (on the genomic reference strand), and p is the
number of patients analyzed. Asymmetry was then calculated in a given
region by:
ab/m = log2
rb1:b2/m1:m2
rb2:b1/m2:m1

as seen in Figure 1.
Calculating Global Mutational Asymmetries
When calculating global mutational asymmetries, redundant mutations with
respect to a given strand are summed together. For example, to calculate
global genome mutational densities with respect to the leading strand, we
calculate:
rb1:b2/m1:m2 = nl;b1/m1 + nr;b2/m2
p  ðNl;b1 + Nr;b2Þ
rb2:b1/m2:m1 = nl;b2/m2 + nr;b1/m1
p  ðNl;b2 + Nr;b1Þ
ab/m = log2
rb1:b2/m1:m2
rb2:b1/m2:m1

where subscripts ‘‘l’’ and ‘‘r’’ refer to events in left- and right-replicating re-
gions, respectively. Essentially, this approach distinguishes a b1:b2 base pair
by whether base b1 is on the presumed leading/lagging strand rather than
the genomic reference. The same approach is used for calculating asymmetry
with respect to the sense strand, using tx(+) and tx() regions instead of left-
and right-replicating, respectively.
Correlation of R-Class Asymmetry with Direction of TTRs
Replication timing data and POLE, APOBEC, and MSI asymmetry metrics
were aggregated in 100 kb bins and smoothed using a moving average over
10 bins. The replication timing data were plotted, and the proﬁles were colored
by the asymmetry metrics in the POLE cohort (Figure 2) or all three R-class co-
horts (Figure 4). Correlations restricted to TTRs were calculated by only
considering regions with a slope of >250 rtu/Mb.
Binning by Expression and Replication Timing
Expression proﬁles were an average of many cell lines, as used in Lawrence
et al., (2013). To perform binning by functional covariates as seen in Figures
5A and 5B, expression and replication timing values were projected onto
20 kb intervals. These intervals were then sorted by expression for Figure 5A
and replication timing for Figure 5B and separated into bins with an even num-
ber of intervals, and mutational rates and asymmetry were calculated for the
intervals in each bin.
Identifying Transcription and Replication Direction Transitions
Minus-to-plus transcription transitions were identiﬁed by taking all bidirec-
tional gene pairs (opposing genes with transcription start sites within 1 kb
of each other ; Trinklein et al., 2004) in the Refseq database and calculating
the midpoint of their transcription start sites. Left-to-right replication transi-
tions were similarly identiﬁed by calculating the midpoint between the
right and left boundaries of deﬁned left- and right-replicating regions,
respectively.
Determining Response of Mutational Densities to Increasing
Expression
Response of mutational densities to increasing expression, as shown in Fig-
ures 7B and 7C, was performed for each patient and for each of the six
possible mutations, creating a ﬁgure as shown in Figure 7D. Then linear
regression was performed separately on each series of bars (the left bars
for the non-transcribed strand and the right bars for the transcribed strand).
For these two regressions, we calculated a 95% conﬁdence interval for the
slope and assessed signiﬁcance based on whether zero fell inside of the
interval. Then for each regression, we plotted the more conservative bound
of the corresponding conﬁdence interval, i.e., the value closer to or equal
to zero.
Creating a Hypothetical Replication Timing Distribution
The hypothetical replication timing curve shown in Figure S1A was created by
ﬁrst taking its real counterpart in Figure S1B. Then the locations of origins of
replication were randomly assigned, assuming a density of one origin per 40
kb. From these origins, a more detailed proﬁle was drawn by assuming con-
stant polymerase speed and smoothing the result.
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental Information includes seven ﬁgures and three tables and can be
found with this article online at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2015.12.050.
Cell 164, 538–549, January 28, 2016 ª2016 Elsevier Inc.
547

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Conceptualization, M.S.L., P.P., G.G., N.J.H., P.S., D.A.W., E.S., K.R.C., A.
Koren, and J.K.; Methodology, M.S.L., P.P., N.J.H., and P.S.; Software,
N.J.H. and M.S.L.; Formal Analysis, N.J.H., M.S.L., and P.P.; Investigation,
N.J.H., P.P., and M.S.L.; Resources, M.S.L., G.G., A. Koren, and D.A.W.;
Data Curation, E.R., N.J.H., P.P., M.S.L., and A. Koren; Writing – Original Draft,
N.J.H., M.S.L., A. Koren, P.P., and G.G.; Writing – Review & Editing, N.J.H.,
M.S.L., A. Koren, P.P., G.G., D.A.W., P.C.H., E.S., K.R.C., E.R., J.M.H., P.S.,
Y.E.M., A. Kamburov, and L.Z.B.; Visualization, N.J.H. and M.S.L.; Supervi-
sion, G.G., M.S.L., P.P., A. Koren, D.A.W., and P.C.H.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Ashok Bhagwat and Steven Roberts and their collaborators for
sharing their unpublished data with us and allowing us to reference them in
this work. We thank John Iafrate for valuable insights about the relevance of
strand asymmetry in carcinogenesis. G.G. was partially funded by the
Paul C. Zamecnik, MD, Chair in Oncology at Massachusetts General Hospital.
G.G. and M.S.L. were partially funded by the NIH TCGA Genome Data Analysis
Center (U24CA143845). M.S.L. was partially funded by the NHGRI Genome
Sequencing Center (U54HG003067). E.S., K.R.C., and D.A.W. were partially
funded by NHGRI grant (U54HG003273). N.J.H., P.P., Y.E.M., and A. Kam-
burov were funded by G.G.’s startup funds at MGH.
Received: November 13, 2015
Revised: December 21, 2015
Accepted: December 24, 2015
Published: January 21, 2016
REFERENCES
Alexandrov, L.B., Nik-Zainal, S., Wedge, D.C., Aparicio, S.A., Behjati, S., Bian-
kin, A.V., Bignell, G.R., Bolli, N., Borg, A., Børresen-Dale, A.L., et al.; Australian
Pancreatic Cancer Genome Initiative; ICGC Breast Cancer Consortium; ICGC
MMML-Seq Consortium; ICGC PedBrain (2013). Signatures of mutational pro-
cesses in human cancer. Nature 500, 415–421.
Bass, A.J., Lawrence, M.S., Brace, L.E., Ramos, A.H., Drier, Y., Cibulskis, K.,
Sougnez, C., Voet, D., Saksena, G., Sivachenko, A., et al. (2011). Genomic
sequencing of colorectal adenocarcinomas identiﬁes a recurrent VTI1A-
TCF7L2 fusion. Nat. Genet. 43, 964–968.
Berger, M.F., Hodis, E., Heffernan, T.P., Deribe, Y.L., Lawrence, M.S., Proto-
popov, A., Ivanova, E., Watson, I.R., Nickerson, E., Ghosh, P., et al. (2012).
Melanoma genome sequencing reveals frequent PREX2 mutations. Nature
485, 502–506.
Bhagwat, A.S., Hao, W., Townes, J.P., Lee, H., Tang, H., and Foster, P.L.
(2016). Strand-biased Cytosine deamination at the Replication Fork causes
Cytosine to Thymine Mutations in Escherichia coli. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA. http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1522325113.
Cairns, J. (2006). Cancer and the immortal strand hypothesis. Genetics 174,
1069–1072.
Carreras Puigvert, J., Sanjiv, K., and Helleday, T. (2015). Targeting DNA repair,
DNA metabolism and replication stress as anti-cancer strategies. FEBS J.
Published online October 28, 2015. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/febs.13574.
Chapman, M.A., Lawrence, M.S., Keats, J.J., Cibulskis, K., Sougnez, C.,
Schinzel, A.C., Harview, C.L., Brunet, J.P., Ahmann, G.J., Adli, M., et al.
(2011). Initial genome sequencing and analysis of multiple myeloma. Nature
471, 467–472.
Chen, C.L., Duquenne, L., Audit, B., Guilbaud, G., Rappailles, A., Baker, A.,
Huvet, M., d’Aubenton-Carafa, Y., Hyrien, O., Arneodo, A., and Thermes, C.
(2011). Replication-associated mutational asymmetry in the human genome.
Mol. Biol. Evol. 28, 2327–2337.
Conticello, S.G. (2012). Creative deaminases, self-inﬂicted damage, and
genome evolution. Ann. N Y Acad. Sci. 1267, 79–85.
Curtin, N.J. (2012). DNA repair dysregulation from cancer driver to therapeutic
target. Nat. Rev. Cancer 12, 801–817.
Denissenko, M.F., Pao, A., Tang, M., and Pfeifer, G.P. (1996). Preferential for-
mation of benzo[a]pyrene adducts at lung cancer mutational hotspots in P53.
Science 274, 430–432.
Donahue, B.A., Yin, S., Taylor, J.S., Reines, D., and Hanawalt, P.C. (1994).
Transcript cleavage by RNA polymerase II arrested by a cyclobutane pyrimi-
dine dimer in the DNA template. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 91, 8502–8506.
Dulak, A.M., Stojanov, P., Peng, S., Lawrence, M.S., Fox, C., Stewart, C.,
Bandla, S., Imamura, Y., Schumacher, S.E., Sheﬂer, E., et al. (2013). Exome
and whole-genome sequencing of esophageal adenocarcinoma identiﬁes
recurrent driver events and mutational complexity. Nat. Genet. 45, 478–486.
Fousteri, M., and Mullenders, L.H. (2008). Transcription-coupled nucleotide
excision repair in mammalian cells: molecular mechanisms and biological ef-
fects. Cell Res. 18, 73–84.
Francioli, L.C., Polak, P.P., Koren, A., Menelaou, A., Chun, S., Renkens, I., van
Duijn, C.M., Swertz, M., Wijmenga, C., van Ommen, G., et al.; Genome of the
Netherlands Consortium (2015). Genome-wide patterns and properties of de
novo mutations in humans. Nat. Genet. 47, 822–826.
Green, P., Ewing, B., Miller, W., Thomas, P.J., and Green, E.D.; NISC Compar-
ative Sequencing Program (2003). Transcription-associated mutational asym-
metry in mammalian evolution. Nat. Genet. 33, 514–517.
Guilbaud, G., Rappailles, A., Baker, A., Chen, C.L., Arneodo, A., Goldar, A.,
d’Aubenton-Carafa, Y., Thermes, C., Audit, B., and Hyrien, O. (2011). Evidence
for sequential and increasing activation of replication origins along replication
timing gradients in the human genome. PLoS Comput. Biol. 7, e1002322.
Hanawalt, P.C., and Spivak, G. (2008). Transcription-coupled DNA repair: two
decades of progress and surprises. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 9, 958–970.
Helleday, T., Eshtad, S., and Nik-Zainal, S. (2014). Mechanisms underlying
mutational signatures in human cancers. Nat. Rev. Genet. 15, 585–598.
Hoopes, J., Cortez, L., Mertz, T., Malc, E.P., Mieczkowski, P.A., and Roberts,
S.A. (2016). APOBEC3A and APOBEC3B Deaminate the Lagging Strand Tem-
plate during DNA Replication. Cell Reports. Published online January 28, 2016.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2016.01.021.
Jiang, G., and Sancar, A. (2006). Recruitment of DNA damage checkpoint pro-
teins to damage in transcribed and nontranscribed sequences. Mol. Cell. Biol.
26, 39–49.
Jinks-Robertson, S., and Bhagwat, A.S. (2014). Transcription-associated
mutagenesis. Annu. Rev. Genet. 48, 341–359.
Johnson, R.E., Klassen, R., Prakash, L., and Prakash, S. (2015). A Major Role
of DNA Polymerase d in Replication of Both the Leading and Lagging DNA
Strands. Mol. Cell 59, 163–175.
Kane, M.F., Loda, M., Gaida, G.M., Lipman, J., Mishra, R., Goldman, H.,
Jessup, J.M., and Kolodner, R. (1997). Methylation of the hMLH1 promoter
correlates with lack of expression of hMLH1 in sporadic colon tumors and
mismatch repair-defective human tumor cell lines. Cancer Res. 57, 808–811.
Kasar, S., Kim, J., Improgo, R., Tiao, G., Polak, P., Haradhvala, N., Lawrence,
M.S., Kiezun, A., Fernandes, S.M., Bahl, S., et al. (2015). Whole-genome
sequencing reveals activation-induced cytidine deaminase signatures during
indolent chronic lymphocytic leukaemia evolution. Nat. Commun. 6, 8866.
Kazanov, M.D., Roberts, S.A., Polak, P., Stamatoyannopoulos, J., Klimczak,
L.J., Gordenin, D.A., and Sunyaev, S.R. (2015). APOBEC-Induced Cancer Mu-
tations Are Uniquely Enriched in Early-Replicating, Gene-Dense, and Active
Chromatin Regions. Cell Rep. 13, 1103–1109.
Kennedy, S.R., Loeb, L.A., and Herr, A.J. (2012). Somatic mutations in aging,
cancer and neurodegeneration. Mech. Ageing Dev. 133, 118–126.
Kenyon, C.J. (2010). The genetics of ageing. Nature 464, 504–512.
Koren, A., Tsai, H.J., Tirosh, I., Burrack, L.S., Barkai, N., and Berman, J. (2010).
Epigenetically-inherited centromere and neocentromere DNA replicates
earliest in S-phase. PLoS Genet. 6, e1001068.
Koren, A., Polak, P., Nemesh, J., Michaelson, J.J., Sebat, J., Sunyaev, S.R.,
and McCarroll, S.A. (2012). Differential relationship of DNA replication timing
548
Cell 164, 538–549, January 28, 2016 ª2016 Elsevier Inc.

to different forms of human mutation and variation. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 91,
1033–1040.
Lada, A.G., Kliver, S.F., Dhar, A., Polev, D.E., Masharsky, A.E., Rogozin, I.B.,
and Pavlov, Y.I. (2015). Disruption of Transcriptional Coactivator Sub1 Leads
to Genome-Wide Re-distribution of Clustered Mutations Induced by APOBEC
in Active Yeast Genes. PLoS Genet. 11, e1005217.
Lawrence, M.S., Stojanov, P., Polak, P., Kryukov, G.V., Cibulskis, K., Siva-
chenko, A., Carter, S.L., Stewart, C., Mermel, C.H., Roberts, S.A., et al.
(2013). Mutational heterogeneity in cancer and the search for new cancer-
associated genes. Nature 499, 214–218.
Lawrence, M.S., Stojanov, P., Mermel, C.H., Robinson, J.T., Garraway, L.A.,
Golub, T.R., Meyerson, M., Gabriel, S.B., Lander, E.S., and Getz, G. (2014).
Discovery and saturation analysis of cancer genes across 21 tumour types.
Nature 505, 495–501.
Lobry, J.R. (1996). Asymmetric substitution patterns in the two DNA strands of
bacteria. Mol. Biol. Evol. 13, 660–665.
Lujan, S.A., Williams, J.S., Pursell, Z.F., Abdulovic-Cui, A.A., Clark, A.B., Nick
McElhinny, S.A., and Kunkel, T.A. (2012). Mismatch repair balances leading
and lagging strand DNA replication ﬁdelity. PLoS Genet. 8, e1003016.
McLean, M.J., Wolfe, K.H., and Devine, K.M. (1998). Base composition skews,
replication orientation, and gene orientation in 12 prokaryote genomes. J. Mol.
Evol. 47, 691–696.
Mellon, I., Spivak, G., and Hanawalt, P.C. (1987). Selective removal of tran-
scription-blocking DNA damage from the transcribed strand of the mammalian
DHFR gene. Cell 51, 241–249.
Middleton, F.K., Patterson, M.J., Elstob, C.J., Fordham, S., Herriott, A., Wade,
M.A., McCormick, A., Edmondson, R., May, F.E., Allan, J.M., et al. (2015).
Common cancer-associated imbalances in the DNA damage response confer
sensitivity to single agent ATR inhibition. Oncotarget 6, 32396–32409.
Miyabe, I., Kunkel, T.A., and Carr, A.M. (2011). The major roles of DNA poly-
merases epsilon and delta at the eukaryotic replication fork are evolutionarily
conserved. PLoS Genet. 7, e1002407.
Nick McElhinny, S.A., Gordenin, D.A., Stith, C.M., Burgers, P.M., and Kunkel,
T.A. (2008). Division of labor at the eukaryotic replication fork. Mol. Cell 30,
137–144.
Nik-Zainal, S., Alexandrov, L.B., Wedge, D.C., Van Loo, P., Greenman, C.D.,
Raine, K., Jones, D., Hinton, J., Marshall, J., Stebbings, L.A., et al.; Breast Can-
cer Working Group of the International Cancer Genome Consortium (2012a).
Mutational processes molding the genomes of 21 breast cancers. Cell 149,
979–993.
Nik-Zainal, S., Van Loo, P., Wedge, D.C., Alexandrov, L.B., Greenman, C.D.,
Lau, K.W., Raine, K., Jones, D., Marshall, J., Ramakrishna, M., et al.; Breast
Cancer Working Group of the International Cancer Genome Consortium
(2012b). The life history of 21 breast cancers. Cell 149, 994–1007.
Pavlov, Y.I., Newlon, C.S., and Kunkel, T.A. (2002). Yeast origins establish a
strand bias for replicational mutagenesis. Mol. Cell 10, 207–213.
Pleasance, E.D., Cheetham, R.K., Stephens, P.J., McBride, D.J., Humphray,
S.J., Greenman, C.D., Varela, I., Lin, M.L., Ordo´ n˜ ez, G.R., Bignell, G.R.,
et al. (2010a). A comprehensive catalogue of somatic mutations from a human
cancer genome. Nature 463, 191–196.
Pleasance, E.D., Stephens, P.J., O’Meara, S., McBride, D.J., Meynert, A.,
Jones, D., Lin, M.L., Beare, D., Lau, K.W., Greenman, C., et al. (2010b).
A small-cell lung cancer genome with complex signatures of tobacco expo-
sure. Nature 463, 184–190.
Poduri, A., Evrony, G.D., Cai, X., and Walsh, C.A. (2013). Somatic mutation,
genomic variation, and neurological disease. Science 341, 1237758.
Polak, P., and Arndt, P.F. (2008). Transcription induces strand-speciﬁc muta-
tions at the 50 end of human genes. Genome Res. 18, 1216–1223.
Polak, P., Querfurth, R., and Arndt, P.F. (2010). The evolution of transcription-
associated biases of mutations across vertebrates. BMC Evol. Biol. 10, 187.
Polak, P., Lawrence, M.S., Haugen, E., Stoletzki, N., Stojanov, P., Thurman,
R.E., Garraway, L.A., Mirkin, S., Getz, G., Stamatoyannopoulos, J.A., and Su-
nyaev, S.R. (2014). Reduced local mutation density in regulatory DNA of can-
cer genomes is linked to DNA repair. Nat. Biotechnol. 32, 71–75.
Polak, P., Karlic, R., Koren, A., Thurman, R., Sandstrom, R., Lawrence, M.S.,
Reynolds, A., Rynes, E., Vlahovicek, K., Stamatoyannopoulos, J.A., and
Sunyaev, S.R. (2015). Cell-of-origin chromatin organization shapes the muta-
tional landscape of cancer. Nature 518, 360–364.
Rhind, N., and Gilbert, D.M. (2013). DNA replication timing. Cold Spring Harb.
Perspect. Biol. 5, a010132.
Roberts, S.A., Lawrence, M.S., Klimczak, L.J., Grimm, S.A., Fargo, D., Stoja-
nov, P., Kiezun, A., Kryukov, G.V., Carter, S.L., Saksena, G., et al. (2013). An
APOBEC cytidine deaminase mutagenesis pattern is widespread in human
cancers. Nat. Genet. 45, 970–976.
Ross, K.A. (2014). Coherent somatic mutation in autoimmune disease. PLoS
ONE 9, e101093.
Ryba, T., Hiratani, I., Lu, J., Itoh, M., Kulik, M., Zhang, J., Schulz, T.C., Robins,
A.J., Dalton, S., and Gilbert, D.M. (2010). Evolutionarily conserved replication
timing proﬁles predict long-range chromatin interactions and distinguish
closely related cell types. Genome Res. 20, 761–770.
Shinbrot, E., Henninger, E.E., Weinhold, N., Covington, K.R., Go¨ ksenin, A.Y.,
Schultz, N., Chao, H., Doddapaneni, H., Muzny, D.M., Gibbs, R.A., et al.
(2014). Exonuclease mutations in DNA polymerase epsilon reveal replication
strand speciﬁc mutation patterns and human origins of replication. Genome
Res. 24, 1740–1750.
Spivak, G., and Ganesan, A.K. (2014). The complex choreography of transcrip-
tion-coupled repair. DNA Repair (Amst.) 19, 64–70.
Stillman, B. (2015). Reconsidering DNA Polymerases at the Replication Fork in
Eukaryotes. Mol. Cell 59, 139–141.
Supek, F., and Lehner, B. (2015). Differential DNA mismatch repair underlies
mutation rate variation across the human genome. Nature 521, 81–84.
Taylor, B.J., Nik-Zainal, S., Wu, Y.L., Stebbings, L.A., Raine, K., Campbell,
P.J., Rada, C., Stratton, M.R., and Neuberger, M.S. (2013). DNA deaminases
induce break-associated mutation showers with implication of APOBEC3B
and 3A in breast cancer kataegis. eLife 2, e00534.
Taylor, B.J., Wu, Y.L., and Rada, C. (2014). Active RNAP pre-initiation sites are
highly mutated by cytidine deaminases in yeast, with AID targeting small RNA
genes. eLife 3, e03553.
Tomasetti, C., and Bozic, I. (2015). The (not so) immortal strand hypothesis.
Stem Cell Res. (Amst.) 14, 238–241.
Touchon, M., Nicolay, S., Audit, B., Brodie of Brodie, E.B., d’Aubenton-Carafa,
Y., Arneodo, A., and Thermes, C. (2005). Replication-associated strand asym-
metries in mammalian genomes: toward detection of replication origins. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 102, 9836–9841.
Trinklein, N.D., Aldred, S.F., Hartman, S.J., Schroeder, D.I., Otillar, R.P., and
Myers, R.M. (2004). An abundance of bidirectional promoters in the human
genome. Genome Res. 14, 62–66.
Vilar, E., and Gruber, S.B. (2010). Microsatellite instability in colorectal cancer-
the stable evidence. Nat. Rev. Clin. Oncol. 7, 153–162.
Waddell, N., Pajic, M., Patch, A.M., Chang, D.K., Kassahn, K.S., Bailey, P.,
Johns, A.L., Miller, D., Nones, K., Quek, K., et al.; Australian Pancreatic Cancer
Genome Initiative (2015). Whole genomes redeﬁne the mutational landscape
of pancreatic cancer. Nature 518, 495–501.
Wang, L., Lawrence, M.S., Wan, Y., Stojanov, P., Sougnez, C., Stevenson, K.,
Werner, L., Sivachenko, A., DeLuca, D.S., Zhang, L., et al. (2011). SF3B1 and
other novel cancer genes in chronic lymphocytic leukemia. N. Engl. J. Med.
365, 2497–2506.
Yadlapalli, S., and Yamashita, Y.M. (2013). DNA asymmetry in stem cells -
immortal or mortal? J. Cell Sci. 126, 4069–4076.
Yu, C., Gan, H., Han, J., Zhou, Z.X., Jia, S., Chabes, A., Farrugia, G., Ordog, T.,
and Zhang, Z. (2014). Strand-speciﬁc analysis shows protein binding at repli-
cation forks and PCNA unloading from lagging strands when forks stall. Mol.
Cell 56, 551–563.
Cell 164, 538–549, January 28, 2016 ª2016 Elsevier Inc.
549

Supplemental Figures
Figure S1. Deriving Replication-Direction Enrichment from Replication Timing Slope, Related to Figure 1
General trends in replication direction are captured without needing to know the locations of replication origins (ORIs). In the right panel is a segment of an
observed replication timing proﬁle. In our analysis, we assign the left (blue) region of the plot, which has negative slope, as being ‘‘predominantly left-replicating,’’
and the right (red) positively sloped region as ‘‘predominantly right-replicating.’’ In reality this replication timing proﬁle is likely generated by multiple sequentially
ﬁring ORIs, which can be variable in their ﬁring. For example, it could look like the hypothetical curve on the left, with many replication origins distributed
throughout this region and ﬁring at many different times. Due to the ﬁnite resolution of the replication-time assay, some of this detail is lost, and we observe only
the ‘‘smoothed’’ version in the right panel. However, it remains true that the blue curve is mostly left-replicating, and the right curve is mostly right-replicating. This
enrichment of single-direction replication is what allows us to observe replicative strand asymmetries in mutational patterns.
Cell 164, 538–549, January 28, 2016 ª2016 Elsevier Inc.
S1

Figure S2. Consistency of POLE Asymmetry across Replication Timing Datasets from Different Tissues and Cell Lines, Related to Figure 1
Plot shows direction and magnitude of replicative asymmetry calculated from POLE C:G/A:T mutations using left- and right-replicating regions deﬁned from the
eight different replication timing proﬁles published in (Ryba et al., 2010). Asymmetry is measured as the log2 of the ratio of C/A:G/T mutational densities with
respect to the leading strand. The measurement of replicative asymmetry is highly robust to using different replication timing datasets: all yield a value be-
tween +0.5 and +0.6.
S2
Cell 164, 538–549, January 28, 2016 ª2016 Elsevier Inc.

Figure S3. Analysis of Asymmetry across Eight Replication Timing Proﬁles, Related to Figure 3
This recreation of Figure 3 demonstrates that the robustness of the replicative asymmetry metric to different replication timing proﬁles holds across tumor types.
Replicative asymmetry was re-calculated using the left- and right-replicating deﬁnitions from eight different replication timing proﬁles as described above.
Measurements for a given tumor type are highly concordant across the different replication timing proﬁles used in the calculation.
Cell 164, 538–549, January 28, 2016 ª2016 Elsevier Inc.
S3

Figure S4. Concordance of Asymmetry among Three Distinct R-Class Mutational Processes Holds Also across Replication Timing Datasets,
Related to Figure 4
Plot recreates Figure 4 using the eight different replication timing proﬁles published in (Ryba et al., 2010) for chromosome 19. Concordance of asymmetry across
mutational processes is robust to tissue-speciﬁc replication timing variation.
S4
Cell 164, 538–549, January 28, 2016 ª2016 Elsevier Inc.

(legend on next page)
Cell 164, 538–549, January 28, 2016 ª2016 Elsevier Inc.
S5

Figure S5. Joint Analysis of T- and R-Class Asymmetries for Enriched Cohorts, Related to Figure 5
Joint analysis of T- and R-class asymmetries as in Figure 1E,F for the cohorts shown in Figure 5: (A) Liver cancers, (B) Lung cancers with strong smoking signature,
(C) Melanomas with a signature of UV exposure, (D) Microsatellite-stable colorectal cancers, (E) Microsatellite-instable cancers, (F) Bladder, breast, and head and
heck cancers with a strong APOBEC-associated signature, and (G) mutant-POLE colorectal and endometrial cancers.
S6
Cell 164, 538–549, January 28, 2016 ª2016 Elsevier Inc.

Figure S6. APOBEC Asymmetry in 50 UTRs of Transcripts, Related to Figure 6
Plot recreates Figure 6B, showing joint asymmetry analysis of mutations in APOBEC-enriched tumors, but restricts to analyzing just the 50-UTRs of transcribed
regions. In these regions a moderate transcriptional asymmetry becomes visible. Error bars represent 95% conﬁdence interval.
Cell 164, 538–549, January 28, 2016 ª2016 Elsevier Inc.
S7

Figure S7. De Novo Mutations in the Human Germline Reveal Replicative Asymmetry in the Preferred TCW Motif of APOBEC, Related to
Figure 6
Replicative asymmetry of C/G and C/T mutations can be measured in the TC[AjT] context, but not outside. Mutational densities are calculated with respect to
a leading-strand reference. CpG motifs were excluded from this analysis since they have a comparatively high mutation rate in these samples and can obscure
the signal from events at other C:G basepairs. Error bars represent 95% conﬁdence intervals.
S8
Cell 164, 538–549, January 28, 2016 ª2016 Elsevier Inc.
