Cancer Cell
Article
Locally Disordered Methylation Forms
the Basis of Intratumor Methylome Variation
in Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia
Dan A. Landau,1,2,3,13 Kendell Clement,3,4,5,13 Michael J. Ziller,3,4 Patrick Boyle,3 Jean Fan,6 Hongcang Gu,3
Kristen Stevenson,7 Carrie Sougnez,3 Lili Wang,1,2 Shuqiang Li,8 Dylan Kotliar,1 Wandi Zhang,1 Mahmoud Ghandi,3
Levi Garraway,2,3 Stacey M. Fernandes,2 Kenneth J. Livak,8 Stacey Gabriel,3 Andreas Gnirke,3 Eric S. Lander,3
Jennifer R. Brown,2,9 Donna Neuberg,7 Peter V. Kharchenko,6,10 Nir Hacohen,3,11 Gad Getz,3,12,14
Alexander Meissner,3,4,14,* and Catherine J. Wu1,2,10,14,*
1Cancer Vaccine Center
2Department of Medical Oncology
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02115, USA
3Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
4Department of Stem Cell and Regenerative Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA
5Harvard-MIT Division of Health Sciences and Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
6Center for Biomedical Informatics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA
7Department of Biostatistics and Computational Biology, Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02115, USA
8Fluidigm, South San Francisco, CA 94080, USA
9Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA
10Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children’s Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA
11Center for Immunology and Inﬂammatory Diseases
12Cancer Center and Department of Pathology
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 02114, USA
13Co-ﬁrst author
14Co-senior author
*Correspondence: alexander_meissner@harvard.edu (A.M.), cwu@partners.org (C.J.W.)
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ccell.2014.10.012
SUMMARY
Intratumoral heterogeneity plays a critical role in tumor evolution. To deﬁne the contribution of DNA methyl-
ation to heterogeneity within tumors, we performed genome-scale bisulﬁte sequencing of 104 primary
chronic lymphocytic leukemias (CLLs). Compared with 26 normal B cell samples, CLLs consistently dis-
played higher intrasample variability of DNA methylation patterns across the genome, which appears to arise
from stochastically disordered methylation in malignant cells. Transcriptome analysis of bulk and single CLL
cells revealed that methylation disorder was linked to low-level expression. Disordered methylation was
further associated with adverse clinical outcome. We therefore propose that disordered methylation plays
a similar role to that of genetic instability, enhancing the ability of cancer cells to search for superior evolu-
tionary trajectories.
INTRODUCTION
Cancer evolution is a central obstacle to achieving cure, as treat-
ment-resistant disease often emerges even in the context of
highly effective therapies. Recent studies by us and others
have demonstrated the contribution of genetic heterogeneity
within each individual cancer to clonal evolution and its impact
on clinical outcome (reviewed in Landau et al., 2014). In addition
Signiﬁcance
Although it is well established that genetic intratumoral diversity fuels tumor evolution, relatively little is known about epige-
netic diversity in primary cancer samples and its impact on evolution and outcomes. Using a variety of molecular platforms,
we demonstrated a higher degree of intratumoral heterogeneity of DNA methylation in CLL. We have further shown that this
heterogeneity stems from seemingly stochastic variation, reminiscent of the model of genetic heterogeneity in cancer,
wherein stochastic variation is subjected to selection in tumor evolution. These data transform the way we view methylation
differences between normal and cancer cells and will facilitate the crucial distinction between epigenetic alterations that
result from background stochastic variation versus positive selection, in this leukemia and other cancers.
Cancer Cell 26, 813–825, December 8, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc.
813

to genetic mutations, somatic epigenetic alterations are also
drivers of neoplastic transformation and ﬁtness (Baylin, 2005;
Baylin and Jones, 2011). Moreover, genetically uniform cells
exhibit phenotypic variation in essential properties such as sur-
vival capacity and proliferative potential (Kreso et al., 2013;
Spencer et al., 2009), likely reﬂecting epigenetic variation.
Hence, a priority in cancer biology is to measure intratumoral
heterogeneity at the epigenetic level and determine how somatic
genetic and epigenetic heterogeneity together affect tumor
evolution.
To examine these critical questions, we focused on chronic
lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), a malignancy of mature B cells
with well-documented epigenetic dysregulation of CLL-associ-
ated genes (Raval et al., 2007; Yuille et al., 2001). Stable dif-
ferences have been observed in DNA methylation across CLL
samples compared with normal B cells as well as between sub-
types of CLL (e.g., with mutated versus unmutated IGHV) (Cahill
et al., 2013; Harris et al., 2010; Kulis et al., 2012; Pei et al., 2012).
We were motivated to perform an integrative study of intraleuke-
mic genetic and DNA methylation heterogeneity in CLL because
(1) recent studies have suggested that both epigenetic marks
and genetic alterations can improve prognostic models of CLL
(Kulis et al., 2012; Rossi et al., 2013); (2) higher methylation vari-
ability has been detected across cancer subtypes compared
with healthy tissue-matched samples, including in other B cell
malignancies (Berman et al., 2012; De et al., 2013; Hansen
et al., 2011); and (3) the availability of whole-genome bisulﬁte
sequencing
(WGBS)
and
reduced-representation
bisulﬁte
sequencing (RRBS) now enables genome-wide investigation of
DNA methylation at single base pair resolution and with local
sequence context. In particular, RRBS constitutes a cost-effec-
tive approach that allows the study of large patient cohorts
(Boyle et al., 2012).
We thus performed WGBS and RRBS on a large cohort of pri-
mary patient samples that were previously characterized by
whole-exome sequencing (WES) (Landau et al., 2013), to assess
intraleukemic DNA methylation heterogeneity in CLL.
RESULTS
Increased Intrasample DNA Methylation Heterogeneity
in CLL Arises from Locally Disordered Methylation
To measure intrasample CLL DNA methylation heterogeneity, we
compared WGBS data generated from two CLL cases and two
healthy donor B cell samples (Figure 1A). We observed globally
decreased methylation in CLL compared with normal B cells,
with focally increased methylation of CpG islands (CGIs) (Fig-
ure 1A, top; Figures S1A–S1C available online), as previously
reported in CLL and other cancers (Baylin and Jones, 2011; Kulis
et al., 2012), but also a markedly increased frequency of
Figure 1. Higher DNA Methylation Intra-
sample Heterogeneity in CLL Arises from
Locally Disordered Methylation
(A) CLL global and CGI methylation compared
with normal B cells, measured with WGBS (top).
Cumulative distribution analysis (bottom) enables
the comparison of the proportion of intermediate
methylation values in WGBS data of CLL and B
cells from healthy adult volunteers (also see Fig-
ure S1).
(B) Mean intrasample CpG variance measured
with RRBS.
(C) Methylation patterns from RRBS data of a CLL
sample (CLL007) show two patterns of methyl-
ation (black circles, methylated CpGs; white cir-
cles, unmethylated): (1) a pattern compatible with
a mixture of cell populations with clear but distinct
methylation states for a particular nonimprinted
locus
(left-SDHAP3
promoter
[chr5:1594239-
1594268]) and (2) a pattern compatible with an
admixture of cells with locally disordered methyl-
ation
(right-PIK3R5
promoter
[chr17:8869616-
8869640]).
(D) A comparison between the intrasample CpG
variance that arises from discordant compared
with concordant reads across the 104 CLLs.
(E) CpG methylation and the PDR were calculated
as shown.
(F) Sample average PDR for CLL, cancer cell
lines, normal B cells, and a collection of primary
healthy human tissues. To enable an accurate
comparison between samples, sample average
PDR is calculated on the basis of a consensus
set of 63,443 CpGs that are covered with
greater than ten reads in >75% of all 202 RRBS
samples.
See also Figure S1 and Tables S1 and S2.
Cancer Cell
Methylation Disorder and Intratumoral Heterogeneity
814
Cancer Cell 26, 813–825, December 8, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc.

intermediate methylation values in CLL (Figure 1A, bottom; Fig-
ures S1A–S1D), pointing to a large proportion of CpGs that are
methylated in some cells in the sample and unmethylated in
others. We reanalyzed published WGBS and Illumina 450 K
methylation array data (Kulis et al., 2012) and conﬁrmed the
increased cell-to-cell variability in CpG methylation in CLL
compared with normal B cells (Figures S1E–S1H).
We next applied RRBS to 104 primary CLL samples that had
been previously characterized by WES (Landau et al., 2013) (Ta-
bles S1 and S2) and examined mean CpG variance. Consistent
with the WGBS data, a greater than 50% increase in intrasample
methylation heterogeneity was detected in CLL cells compared
with 26 normal B cell samples (Figure 1B). We considered two
possible sources for intrasample heterogeneity: variability be-
tween concordantly methylated fragments (i.e., whereby CpGs
in an individual fragment are consistently methylated or unme-
thylated; Figure 1C, left) and variability within DNA fragments
(i.e., discordant methylation by which CpGs in an individual frag-
ment are variably methylated; Figure 1C, right).
On the basis of established observations that short-range
methylation is highly correlated in normal physiological states
(Eckhardt et al., 2006; Jones, 2012), we initially hypothesized
that intrasample heterogeneity in CLL stems from variability be-
tween concordantly methylated fragments, reﬂecting a mixture
of subpopulations with distinct but uniform methylation patterns.
To test this, we focused on CpGs covered by reads containing
four or more neighboring CpGs, as previously suggested
(Landan et al., 2012), and with sufﬁcient read depth (greater
than 10 reads per CpG, with 6.5 million CpGs/sample covered
by 100-mer WGBS reads, and an average of 307,041 [range
278,105–335,977] CpGs/sample covered by 29-mer RRBS
reads). Contrary to the expected hypothesis, we found that
67.6 ± 3.2% (average ± SD) of the intratumoral methylation vari-
ance resulted from discordantly methylated reads across the
104 CLL samples (p = 3.24 3 1035; Figure 1D). Similarly, the
CLL WGBS conﬁrmed a higher proportion of heterogeneously
methylated CpGs in the discordant reads compared with the
concordant reads (Figure S1E, right). These results demonstrate
that methylation heterogeneity in CLL arises primarily from vari-
ability within DNA fragments, which we have therefore termed
‘‘locally disordered methylation.’’
We performed several analyses to exclude potential alterna-
tive explanations to these ﬁndings, including the impact of
contaminating nonmalignant cells (Figure S1I), allele-speciﬁc
methylation (Figures S1J–S1L), the contribution of reads that
cover an ordered transition point from one methylation state to
another (Figure S3L), and technical biases (see Supplemental
Experimental
Procedures).
The
sex
chromosomes
were
excluded from this analysis to avoid possible confounding sex
chromosome-speciﬁc effects. In addition, CLL genomes are
near diploid (Brown et al., 2012), and therefore the analysis
was not signiﬁcantly affected by somatic copy number variations
(see Supplemental Experimental Procedures and Figure S1O).
To quantify the magnitude of this phenomenon across large
collections of normal and malignant human tissues, we analyzed
RRBS data not only from the 104 CLL and 26 B cell samples but
also from 45 solid and blood cancer cell lines and from 27 pri-
mary human tissue samples (Table S2). We then calculated the
proportion of discordant reads (PDR) as the number of discor-
dant over the total number of reads for each CpG in the
consensus set (Figure 1E). As expected, we found that the
average PDR was higher in CLL compared with normal B cells
(p = 5.60 3 1014). Similarly, we found higher PDR in cancer
cell lines compared with a diverse collection of healthy human
tissue samples (p = 4.35 3 1012; Figure 1F). These results sup-
port the idea that locally disordered methylation is a general
property of the malignant process.
Locally Disordered Methylation Broadly Affects the CLL
Genome
To determine whether speciﬁc elements in the genome harbor
higher levels of locally disordered methylation in CLL compared
with normal B cells, we calculated the average PDR across
the 104 CLL samples and 26 healthy donor B cell samples
(Table S3).
In normal B cells, PDR levels were lowest in regions with major
roles in gene regulation (promoters, CGIs, exons, enhancers)
and higher in regions with presumably less of a regulatory role
(CGI shelves and shores, intergenic regions). In CLL, PDR was
higher across all measured regions (Figure 2A), regardless of
whether they were relatively hypermethylated (e.g., CGIs) or hy-
pomethylated (e.g., intergenic regions) compared with normal B
cells (Figure 2B). This phenomenon appeared to be neither spe-
ciﬁc to a subregion of CGIs or promoters (e.g., CGI borders; Fig-
ure 2C) nor restricted to a subtype of CGI (Figure S2A). Increased
PDR in CLL was also observed in highly repetitive DNA se-
quences (e.g., long interspersed elements [LINE] and long ter-
minal repeat retrotransposons; Figure 2A, RRBS data, and
Figure S2B, WGBS data), which largely account for the global
DNA hypomethylation observed in cancer (Ehrlich, 2009).
Alterations in the DNA methylation regulatory machinery could
affect PDR. Unlike other hematological malignancies (Ley et al.,
2010), somatic mutations affecting direct DNA methylation mod-
ulators in CLL are rare (Landau et al., 2013). Nonetheless, three
CLL samples with such somatic mutations (DNMT3A-Q153*,
TET1-N789I,
and
IDH1-S210N)
showed
increased
PDR
compared with the 101 CLL samples wild-type for these genes
(Figure S2C).
Locally Disordered Methylation Appears to Be a Largely
Stochastic Process
Two observations in the data suggest that PDR measures a
process that stochastically increases variation in methylation, a
notion that was recently conceptualized as a feature of the can-
cer epigenome (Pujadas and Feinberg, 2012). First, the perva-
siveness of locally disordered methylation across every region
evaluated in CLL compared with B cells supports a stochastic
genome-wide process. Second, consistent with a stochastic
process, wherein the expected rate of increase in PDR would
be related to the starting level of disorder, we observed a larger
relative PDR increase in CLL in regions with lower PDR in normal
B cells. To formally measure the level of disorder, we undertook a
parallel analysis to calculate Shannon’s information entropy of
intrasample methylation variation (Figure S3A). We determined
this entropy to be higher in CLL than in normal B cells (as well
as higher in cancer cell lines compared with normal tissues),
consistent with an increase in stochastic ‘‘noise’’ (Figures S3B
and S3C).
Cancer Cell
Methylation Disorder and Intratumoral Heterogeneity
Cancer Cell 26, 813–825, December 8, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc.
815

To model the relationship between methylation and PDR un-
der completely stochastic conditions, we plotted the expected
distribution of PDR for any level of methylation assuming a purely
random assignment of methylation states at each individual CpG
(Figure 3A; see Supplemental Experimental Procedures). Strik-
ingly, the distribution of measured PDR and methylation values
of 14,000 individual promoter CGIs from CLL WGBS data
closely followed the pattern of the modeled stochastic process
(Figure 3B). In outlier genes (i.e., those with less promoter PDR
than expected on the basis of the promoter methylation level;
n = 195 [1.4%]; Table S4 and Figure S3D), imprinted genes
were enriched (Morison et al., 2005) as expected, because these
are hemimethylated under normal physiological conditions (n =
10, Fisher’s exact test p = 1.94 3 106). In addition, the outlier
genes contained at least three tumor suppressor genes (WIF1,
DUSP22, and DCC) that have established roles in hematopoietic
malignancies (Chim et al., 2008; Inokuchi et al., 1996; Jantus
Lewintre et al., 2009) and also had >10% higher methylation in
the CLL169 sample compared with the normal CD19+ B cell
sample.
Similar to promoters, methylation of 1,900 LINE repeat ele-
ments also displayed a similar relationship between methylation
and PDR (Figure 3C). A comparable distribution was observed
for other genomic features (Figure S3E) and with RRBS data (Fig-
ure S3F). This pattern was also found in promoter CpGs of tumor
suppressor genes implicated in lymphoproliferation, such as
WT1 (Menke et al., 2002) and DAPK1 (Raval et al., 2007)
(Figure S3G).
Figure 2. Locally Disordered Methylation
Affects
All
Genomic
Regions
in
CLL,
Including CGIs and Repeat Regions
(A and B) Comparison of mean PDR (A) and
mean CpG methylation (B) per genomic region
between CLLs and normal B cells using RRBS
data (Table S3 provides the average number of
CpGs analyzed for each genomic region). Error
bars represent upper 95% CI of the mean.
(C) Top: the distribution of PDR and methylation
across
all
promoters
covered
by
RRBS
for
randomly selected six CLL and six normal B cell
samples. The distribution was derived by dividing
each promoter into 100 bins and then averaging
methylation and PDR for CpGs falling into each bin
across all promoters in the sample. The PDR and
methylation values in the adjacent 2KB upstream
and downstream are also shown. Bottom: an
analogous analysis of CGIs and adjacent shore
regions.
See also Figure S2 and Table S3.
Altogether, these data support the
hypothesis
that
the
most
commonly
described
cancer-related
methylation
alterations (Baylin and Jones, 2011)—
increased
methylation
of
CGIs
and
decreased
methylation
in
repeat
re-
gions—are generated largely through a
seemingly stochastic process. Indeed,
across the 104 CLLs, sample average
promoter CGI PDR was highly correlated
with an increase in sample average promoter CGI methylation
(Pearson’s correlation coefﬁcient r = 0.90, p = 1.01 3 1038;
Figure 3D). When this analysis was repeated with genes group-
ed on the basis of their average methylation level across the
samples, this strong correlation was positive for genes with
methylation < 0.5 and negative for genes with methylation >
0.5, as expected from the previously described distribution in
Figure 3B (Figure S3H). Overall, a key implication of this analysis
is that a change in CGI methylation in CLL does not arise from
alteration in a relatively small proportion of cells with uniformly
methylated alleles but rather from a larger proportion of cells
with randomly scattered methylation. We likewise observed
sample average LINE repeat elements PDR to be correlated
with a decrease in methylation (r = 0.32, p = 6.99 3 104;
Figure 3E).
These data reveal that DNA methylation changes in this cancer
predominately arise from a disordered change in methylation, re-
sulting in a strong correlation between difference in PDR (DPDR)
and difference in methylation (DMeth). Because previous reports
have indicated that a large degree of methylation disorder oc-
curs during normal differentiation (Landan et al., 2012), we
sought to compare the correlation between DPDR and DMeth
among pairs of cancer and normal samples with the correlation
between pairs of healthy human tissues. Indeed, the correlation
coefﬁcient between DPDR and DMeth was signiﬁcantly higher
when CLL samples were paired to either normal B cells or to
other healthy primary tissue samples, compared with the pairing
of healthy primary tissues against either normal B cells or other
Cancer Cell
Methylation Disorder and Intratumoral Heterogeneity
816
Cancer Cell 26, 813–825, December 8, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc.

healthy tissue samples (Figures 3F and 3G). Thus, methylation
changes associated with the malignant process differ substan-
tially from those that occur during changes in physiological
cellular states and show a signiﬁcantly higher degree of methyl-
ation disorder.
Increased Susceptibility to Locally Disordered
Methylation in Gene-Poor Regions and Silent Genes
Some regions of the genome may be more prone to stochastic
variation in methylation (Pujadas and Feinberg, 2012). We found
3-fold higher promoter PDR in regions with the lowest gene
Figure 3. Locally Disordered Methylation in CLL Is Consistent with a Stochastic Process
(A) We developed a model to determine the probability of observing any PDR value in a random CpG methylation state model, given (1) the total number of reads
that cover the locus, (2) the number of neighboring CpGs contained in individual reads, and (3) the locus methylation level. The plot demonstrates the case in
which a locus is covered at a read depth of 30 and each read contains four neighboring CpGs. The expected PDR value is shown by the dashed line, and the
shaded region represents methylation-PDR tuples with a probability greater than 0.01 under the random model.
(B) The CLL methylation data are consistent with the stochastic pattern shown in (A). Average promoter CGI methylation and PDR were calculated for 13,943
CGIs covered by WGBS (more than ten CpGs per island) in both the CLL and the normal B cell samples. Outliers represent 1.4% of events (see Figure S3D and
Table S4).
(C) Average LINE element methylation and PDR were calculated for 1,894 elements covered by WGBS (>20 CpGs per element) in the same samples as in (B).
(D) The correlation in CLL between sample average of CGI methylation and PDR is shown (8,740.2 ± 3,102.8 promoter CGIs per sample were evaluated; see also
Figure S3E).
(E) Similarly, the correlation in CLL between sample average LINE element methylation and PDR are also shown. The RRBS-based results of CLL169 are
highlighted with a purple square.
(F) To study the correlation between DPDR and DMeth, we paired representative CLL and normal B cell samples. For each promoter (>20 CpGs per promoter, n =
2,119), DMeth and DPDR were plotted (red). An identical procedure was performed with a pairing of the same normal B cell sample to an adult lung sample
(Lung_normal_BioSam_235, blue). These data enable the comparison between the Pearson’s coefﬁcient for the correlation between DPDR and DMeth in cancer-
related changes versus normal physiological state changes.
(G) To conﬁrm this ﬁnding across the entire data set, random pairings were performed in each category listed on the x axis, avoiding repeated use of any individual
sample within a category. This procedure was repeated 100 times, and the means of the correlation coefﬁcients for each iteration are plotted and compared.
See also Figure S3 and Table S4.
Cancer Cell
Methylation Disorder and Intratumoral Heterogeneity
Cancer Cell 26, 813–825, December 8, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc.
817

density compared with those with highest gene density (with
similar correlations to CTCF density; Figure 4A). In addition, pre-
viously described hypomethylated blocks are regions notable for
their association with the nuclear lamina and furthermore are en-
riched with genes that have high expression variability in cancer
and impact critical cellular processes such as mitosis and cell
cycle control (Hansen et al., 2011; Timp and Feinberg, 2013).
In these regions as well, we observed a signiﬁcant PDR increase
in CLL (Figures 4B and S4A). Finally, in concert with these ﬁnd-
ings, we observed higher promoter PDR in genes with later repli-
cation time across the 104 CLL samples (r = 0.35, p = 1.3 3
10153; Figure 4C), in agreement with other recent reports (Ber-
man et al., 2012; Shipony et al., 2014). Notably, late replication
time is closely associated with increased somatic mutation
rate (Lawrence et al., 2013). Thus, similar genomic regions may
share lower genetic and epigenetic ﬁdelity, as we observed in
a joint analysis of somatic single-nucleotide variants (sSNVs)
and locally disordered methylation (Figures 4D, S4B, and S4C).
As many features of chromatin and spatial organization may
be shared between the CLL and normal B cell genomes, we
Figure 4. Locally Disordered Methylation Affects Preferentially Gene-Poor Regions and Can Be Traced Back to Nonexpressed Genes in
Normal B Cells
(A) Promoter PDR (orange, error bars represent 95% CIs of means) in relation to gene density (genes/MB, left) and CTCF binding site density (right) regions. As
reference, the CpG content is also provided (black).
(B) PDR and methylation in hypomethylated blocks (Hansen et al., 2011) is plotted for CLL and normal B cells (shown are blocks with >1,000 CpGs in WGBS; see
also Figure S4A for comparison with a matched set of control genomic blocks).
(C) Replication time and PDR are correlated; PDR was averaged for each promoter covered in >70% of 104 CLLs, and these values were grouped in replication
time bins.
(D) To assess the relationship between somatic mutations and PDR, sSNVs were identiﬁed with whole-genome sequencing of matched tumor and germline DNA
(CLL169). Average PDR (left) and methylation (right) were measured in 1,000 bp increments from each somatic mutation. Values of CpGs in each 1,000 bp bin
were averaged over 4,973 sSNVs and plotted as a function of the distance from the somatic mutation. Orange lines denote the locally weighted scatterplot
smoothing. See Figures S4B and S4C for an analysis performed separately for clonal and subclonal mutations.
(E) Left: promoter CGI PDR is correlated between CLL and normal B cell samples (Pearson, evaluated with 5,811 consistently covered CGIs). Right: promoter CGI
PDR in B cells and CLLs is shown for genes expressed and not expressed in normal B cells (FPKM < 1, n = 1,002 from RNA-seq data of seven healthy donor B cell
samples).
See also Figure S4.
Cancer Cell
Methylation Disorder and Intratumoral Heterogeneity
818
Cancer Cell 26, 813–825, December 8, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc.

hypothesized that some degree of locally disordered methylation
might exist in normal B cells in regions with high PDR in CLL. In
fact, average PDR of individual CGI in CLL and B cell samples
was highly correlated (r = 0.83, p < 2 3 1016; Figure 4E, left).
Thus, the promoters with highest PDR in CLL already have
increased PDR in normal B cells. Consistent with the notion
that nonexpressed genes are the most vulnerable to aberrant
methylation (Meissner et al., 2008), promoter CGIs with a high
PDR in both CLL and normal B cells were often found in genes
not expressed in normal B cells (Figure 4E, right).
Locally Disordered Methylation and Gene Expression
To examine the relationship between locally disordered DNA
methylation and gene expression in more detail, we analyzed
matched RRBS and RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) proﬁles of 33
CLL samples (Table S5; PDR and methylation calculated on the
basis of an average ± SD of 12.1 ± 4.8 CpGs per promoter). As
in normal B cells, in the 33 CLL samples, PDR was inversely
correlated with gene expression (r = 0.51, p < 2 3 1016; Fig-
ures 5A, S5A, and S5B). Notably, whereas promoter PDR was
negatively correlated with mean transcript levels, it was positively
correlated with intersample variation in transcript levels (Fig-
ure 5B). Although it may be difﬁcult to deﬁnitively deconvolute
the positive correlation between PDR and expression variation
from the strong negative correlation of mean expression and
expression variation, both low gene expression and high pro-
moter PDR levels were predictive of higher coefﬁcient of variation
(CV) of gene expression in a linear model (p < 2 3 1016 for both).
To further examine the impact of locally disordered methyl-
ation in CLL on expression levels, we calculated the odds ratio
Figure 5. Locally Disordered Methylation Is
Associated with Transcriptional Variation
(A) Mean promoter PDR and gene expression are
correlated (evaluated with 8,570 genes that had
promoter RRBS coverage in >70% of 33 samples
with matched RRBS and RNA-seq, the number of
genes evaluated within each expression range
provided in Figure S5A, and mean expression and
methylation correlation is provided in Figure S5B.
(B) PDR and expression variability as measured
with CV of 5,874 transcribed genes (FPKM > 1).
Black circles (brackets) denote mean CV (95% CI)
for genes within PDR bins (number of genes per
bin in blue). Red line is the cubic smoothing spline
of CV and PDR values (unbinned). Note that the
analysis was limited to transcribed genes to avoid
an artiﬁcial enhancement of the CV that occurs
with very low mean expression values. Because
>97.5% of transcribed genes had PDR < 0.3, we
limited the x axis to PDR < 0.3.
(C) Left: OR (bars denote 95% CI) for gene
expression (FPKM > 1) with a methylated promoter
(average
methylation
>
0.8)
versus
an
un-
methylated promoter (average methylation < 0.2)
is calculated for genes with high (orange, 27.5 ±
2.6% of genes) or low promoter PDR (black).
Right: linear models that combine information
from all 33 CLLs as continuous variables to predict
expression.
(D) PDR and intrasample gene expression het-
erogeneity (assessed by Shannon’s information
entropy) across the range of population average
expression (fragments per million [FPM]), by sin-
gle-cell RNA-seq of 84 cells from CLL005 (see
Figure S5D for analysis of three additional CLL
samples). Local regression lines for genes with low
PDR (0–0.05, blue), intermediate PDR (0.05–0.2,
purple), and high PDR (0.2–1.0, red) are shown.
(E) Results of generalized additive regression tests
that model single-cell gene expression Shannon’s
information entropy on the basis of PDR, popula-
tion average expression, and transcript length
across the four CLL samples.
(F) Single-cell gene expression patterns for genes
within a narrow population average expression
range of 1.0 to 1.2 (black rectangle in D). Consistent with the higher gene expression Shannon’s information entropy observed in genes with higher PDR (top),
genes with low PDR (bottom left) tend to be expressed at high magnitude (larger dot size) in fewer cells, whereas genes with high PDR (bottom right) are frequently
expressed at low expression magnitudes across many cells.
See also Figure S5 and Tables S5 and S6.
Cancer Cell
Methylation Disorder and Intratumoral Heterogeneity
Cancer Cell 26, 813–825, December 8, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc.
819

(OR) of gene expression (deﬁned as fragments per kilobase of
exon per million fragments mapped (FPKM) > 1) with a methyl-
ated promoter (deﬁned as methylation > 0.8, unmethylated
deﬁned as < 0.2). Promoters with low PDR (i.e., lower than the
mean PDR [mean ± SD promoter PDR was 0.10 ± 0.01]) tended
to preserve the expected relationship between promoter methyl-
ation and expression and rarely generated transcripts in the
presence of a methylated promoter. Across 33 CLL samples,
the average OR was 0.043 (range 0.036–0.050). In contrast,
genes with high PDR promoters (greater than the mean PDR)
had a greater likelihood of undergoing transcription (OR 0.396,
range 0.259–0.698, Wilcoxon p = 6.5 3 1011; Figure 5C),
despite comparable promoter methylation levels. As a repre-
sentative example, we show ZNF718 in two samples with com-
parable levels of promoter methylation (0.82 in CLL062, 0.87 in
CLL074) but low promoter PDR (0.04) in the former and high pro-
moter PDR (0.24) in the latter. Consistent with the OR analysis
above,
we observed
undetectable expression in CLL062
(FPKM of 0.03) and measurable RNA expression in CLL074
(FPKM of 5.6) (Figure S5C).
These observations demonstrate how locally disordered
methylation and epigenetic heterogeneity may contribute to
increased transcriptional variation. To assess the relationship
between PDR and gene expression as continuous variables,
we used linear models to predict expression on the basis of
methylation information. Across the 33 samples, a univariate
model that predicts expression on the basis of average promoter
methylation yielded an adjusted R2 value of 0.092, whereas one
using promoter PDR yielded an average adjusted R2 value of
0.202. Inclusion of additional features such as CpG and repeat
content only modestly improved the predictive power of the
model (average adjusted R2 = 0.214; Table S6). Indeed, the
addition of PDR information to a model that uses promoter
methylation to predict gene expression as a continuous variable
(evaluated for 320,574 matched values of expression and
methylation from 33 CLLs) resulted in a signiﬁcant improvement,
with more than doubling of the model’s explanatory power
(increase in adjusted R2 value from 0.0915 to 0.1992, likelihood
ratio test p < 1 3 1016). This held true when the model included
only genes with lowly methylated or only genes with highly meth-
ylated promoters (p < 1 3 1016). Even after adding additional
variables such as repeat element content, the presence of a
CGI in the promoter, and CpG content, PDR remained the stron-
gest predictor of expression (Figure 5C, right).
Single-Cell Gene Expression Patterns of Genes with
Disordered Promoter Methylation
We next isolated 96 individual cells from four CD19+CD5+ puri-
ﬁed CLL samples and generated single-cell full-length transcrip-
tomes using SMART-seq (Clontech; 75–84 cells analyzed per
sample after excluding cells with < 1 3 104 aligned reads; Table
S2). Promoter PDR was associated with signiﬁcantly higher in-
tratumoral expression information entropy in all four samples
(p < 1.4 3 108; Figures 5D, 5E, and S5D), in a model that
included transcript length as well as population average gene
expression (see Supplemental Experimental Procedures), which
is the variable associated most closely with technical noise in
single-cell transcriptome analyses (Shalek et al., 2014). These
results remained signiﬁcant even after the addition of promoter
methylation to the model (Figure S5E). Because expression
information entropy may be affected by variation in sampling
of lowly expressed transcripts, we compared the single-cell
expression patterns of genes with low or high promoter methyl-
ation disorder but with similar population average expression
levels (Figure 5F). We observed that high promoter PDR genes
tend to be expressed in larger numbers of cells at lower expres-
sion magnitude, whereas low promoter PDR genes tend to be
expressed in smaller numbers of cells at higher expression
magnitude. Thus, promoter methylation disorder correlates
with an intermediate transcriptional state that interferes with
both complete silencing and high-level expression.
Locally Disordered Methylation Affects Stem Cell Genes
and May Facilitate Leukemic Evolution
Increased epigenetic ‘‘noise’’ would be expected to generate a
more plastic evolutionary landscape that facilitates the emer-
gence of ﬁtness-enhancing genetic and epigenetic alterations.
To explore the potential relationship between locally disordered
methylation and selection, we identiﬁed differentially methylated
regions (DMRs) in promoters and CGIs, because the presence of
recurrent epigenetic alterations might signal the presence of
evolutionary convergence. In fact, these DMRs were associated
with signiﬁcantly higher PDR, suggestive of positive selection
operating against a backdrop of stochastic epigenetic heteroge-
neity (Figure S6A).
Furthermore, a gene set enrichment analysis of genes with
consistently high promoter PDR across CLL samples compared
with genes with consistently low promoter PDR revealed enrich-
ment in TP53 targets (Perez et al., 2007), in genes differentially
methylated across various malignancies (Acevedo et al., 2008;
Sato et al., 2003), and in gene sets associated with stem cell
biology (Lim et al., 2010; Wong et al., 2008) (BH-FDR Q < 0.1;
Figures 6A and S6B; Table S7). Finally, regions that are specif-
ically hypomethylated in human embryonic stem cells com-
pared with a diverse collection of differentiated cells (Ziller
et al., 2013) also showed decreased methylation and increased
PDR in CLL compared with normal B cells, suggestive of a drift
toward a more stem-cell-like state (Figure 6B). Collectively,
these ﬁndings suggest that locally disordered methylation cre-
ates a rich substrate for CLL evolution by stochastic variation
amenable to positive selection and by increasing the number
of cells that carry the potential to propagate new genotypes
to progeny populations. Indeed, CLLs with a higher number
of subclonal mutations also exhibit higher PDR (p = 0.002;
Figure 6C).
To directly observe the relationship between genetic and
epigenetic evolution, we studied RRBS data from 14 longitudi-
nally sampled CLL patients with characterized patterns of ge-
netic evolution (median time between samples 3.45 years; 9
CLLs with and 5 without evidence of genetic evolution; Table
S8). CLLs that underwent genetic clonal evolution also had
increased average promoter PDR over time (paired t test, p =
0.037; Figure 6D), which may indicate a higher PDR in the
subclone that expanded over time. In addition, genes with pro-
moters that were demethylated over time, were signiﬁcantly en-
riched for the same aforementioned stem cell-related gene sets
(Boquest et al., 2005; Jaatinen et al., 2006; Lim et al., 2010; Wong
et al., 2008) (Figure 6E; Table S9). Importantly, the correlation
Cancer Cell
Methylation Disorder and Intratumoral Heterogeneity
820
Cancer Cell 26, 813–825, December 8, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc.

coefﬁcient between DPDR and DMeth was markedly lower for
gene promoters that were signiﬁcantly demethylated or hyper-
methylated over time (r = 0.0937 and r = 0.0987, respectively),
compared with the correlation coefﬁcient for gene promoters
without signiﬁcant changes in methylation (r = 0.4163; 144,161
promoters across 14 CLLs). These results suggest that gene pro-
moters with signiﬁcant changes in methylation over time were
enriched for genes that underwent ordered methylation change,
as expected from positive selection.
Figure 6. Locally Disordered Methylation
May Interact with Evolution through Drift to-
ward a Stem-like State
(A) Gene set enrichment analysis comparing 1,668
genes with consistently high promoter PDR (>0.1
in >75% of samples) with 5,392 genes with
consistently low promoter PDR (<0.1 in >75% of
samples, selected ten gene sets displayed; see
Table S7 for the top 30 enrichments). Enrichment
in genes with consistently high PDR was calcu-
lated for hypergeometric distribution followed by
BH-FDR (‘‘Q(high)’’). In addition, enrichment in
high-PDR genes versus low-PDR genes was
calculated using Fisher’s exact test followed by
BH-FDR (‘‘Q(high versus low)’’).
(B) PDR and methylation in regions hypomethy-
lated in embryonic stem cells (Ziller et al., 2013), in
CLL compared with normal B cells (WGBS data).
Regions include 91 enhancers (e.g., POU5F1,
NANOG), 41 enhancer CGIs (e.g., TET2, EP400),
six CGIs (e.g., DAPK1), six promoters, and 84
other putative regulatory elements (e.g., DEC1 and
POT1) (Ziller et al., 2013). The inset shows indi-
vidual changes of selected regions.
(C) PDR in CLLs with high versus low numbers of
subclonal (median 7.5 sSNVs) and clonal muta-
tions (median 10 sSNVs).
(D) Fourteen CLLs were sampled longitudinally at
two time points (T1 and T2; median interval time
3.5 years), and change in PDR over time was
compared between CLLs that underwent genetic
clonal evolution (n = 9) and those without genetic
evolution (n = 5) (paired t test).
(E) Gene set enrichment of the 899 genes from the
14 cases with signiﬁcant promoter methylation
change between time points T1 and T2 (absolute
change > 10%, FDR BH Q < 0.1) in genes with
promoter demethylation over time (456 genes),
and in genes with promoter methylation over time
(443 genes; see Table S9 for top 30 enrichments).
See also Figure S6 and Tables S7–S9.
Locally Disordered Methylation
Affects Clinical Outcome
The presented data support a model in
which locally disordered DNA methyl-
ation facilitates tumor evolution through
increased genetic and epigenetic plas-
ticity. Thus, we hypothesized that in-
creased PDR would be associated with
a shorter remission time after treatment,
which we previously linked with clonal
evolution (Landau et al., 2013).
We therefore examined failure-free survival after treatment
(FFS; failure deﬁned as retreatment or death) in 49 patients
included in the cohort who were treated after tumor sampling
for RRBS. A higher mean sample promoter PDR (greater than
the mean for the cohort) was signiﬁcantly associated with
shorter FFS (median FFS of 16.5 versus 44 months, hazard ratio
2.5, 95% conﬁdence interval [CI] 1.1 to 5.7, p = 0.028, Figure 7A;
52% and 65% of patients, respectively, were treated with ﬂu-
darabine-based immunochemotherapy, p = 0.39). A regression
Cancer Cell
Methylation Disorder and Intratumoral Heterogeneity
Cancer Cell 26, 813–825, December 8, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc.
821

model including established CLL risk indicators (IGHV unmu-
tated status, del[17p] and del[11q]) showed an adjusted hazard
ratio of 2.81 (95% CI 1.05–7.53, p = 0.039, Figure 7B) for high
promoter PDR. Similar results were obtained after the inclusion
of additional variables in the model, including mutation burden
and average promoter methylation (Table S10). Samples with
higher promoter PDR were also more likely to have a subclonal
driver mutation as previously deﬁned (Landau et al., 2013) (p =
0.01). When the presence of a subclonal driver was added to the
regression model, the increased risk associated with the
elevated PDR was no longer preserved (Figure 7B). These re-
sults support the notion that epigenetic ‘‘noise’’ may function
primarily as a facilitating feature, allowing the emergence of
subclonal drivers, which then contribute to the adverse clinical
outcome.
DISCUSSION
Cancer epigenomes have been long appreciated to differ from
their normal tissue counterparts (Baylin and Jones, 2011). Global
hypomethylation of cancer DNA was described as early as the
1980s, with frequent focal hypermethylation of key regulatory re-
gions (Jones and Baylin, 2007). Recent genome-wide mapping
have further highlighted alterations likely to contribute to the
malignant process such as the epigenetic silencing of tumor
suppressor genes and the activation of genes in stem-like
cellular programs (Akiyama et al., 2003; Jones and Baylin, 2007;
Widschwendter et al., 2007).
We now report the analysis of DNA methylation in primary leu-
kemia cells that reveals another fundamental difference between
cancer and normal methylomes: locally disordered methylation
arising from a stochastic process, which leads to a high degree
of intrasample methylation heterogeneity. These ﬁndings further
advance key concepts described in several prior reports (Ber-
man et al., 2012; Hansen et al., 2011; Landan et al., 2012; Mae-
gawa et al., 2014; Pujadas and Feinberg, 2012; Siegmund et al.,
2009). Thus, as previously suggested (Timp and Feinberg, 2013),
cancer epigenomes may accommodate a higher amplitude of
epigenetic ‘‘noise’’ and thereby allow cancer cells a greater de-
gree of population diversity. Analogous to the role of genetic
instability, which fuels cancer plasticity by facilitating the acqui-
sition of somatic alterations at random locations across the
genome (Hanahan and Weinberg, 2011), we propose that sto-
chastic methylation changes enhance epigenetic plasticity and
likewise enable tumor cells to better explore the evolutionary
space in search of superior ﬁtness trajectories.
These data alter the way we understand differential methyl-
ation in cancer. First, the insight that stochastic variation under-
lies the bulk of CLL methylome heterogeneity signiﬁes that
changes in methylation measured between cancer and normal
cells do not likely reﬂect a uniform change in methylation state
of a given region but rather a disordered methylation change
involving differing, isolated CpGs, affecting many cells in the
cancer population. Second, these data suggest improved
methods from which we can identify ﬁtness-enhancing DMRs.
We can draw from the lessons of the computational analyses
of large cancer genome sequencing data sets, in which a better
understanding of the variation in the distribution of gene muta-
tions has led to an improved ability to distinguish ‘‘driver’’ from
‘‘passenger’’ mutations (Lawrence et al., 2013). In an analogous
fashion, we anticipate that appreciation of the extent of locally
disordered methylation provides an appropriate background
model against which a departure from the stochastic regime
would indicate positively selected DMRs. We note that only a
small proportion of methylation events fall outside the predic-
tions of the stochastic model, suggesting very few of the
changes in methylation undergo positive selection.
These data moreover demonstrate that locally disordered
methylation is associated with a more ‘‘noisy’’ transcriptional
landscape, with a decoupling of the relationship between pro-
moter methylation and gene expression. Our analysis suggests
that some of the epigenetic variability is likely associated with
stemlike cell programs, which have been implicated in cancer
(Kim et al., 2010; Ohnishi et al., 2014). Indeed, we detected a
concurrent decrease in methylation and an increase in PDR,
affecting regions that were identiﬁed to be hypomethylated in
human embryonic stem cells, consistent with the notion that sto-
chastic noise may lead to a drift toward a hybrid stem-somatic
cell state (Timp and Feinberg, 2013). Furthermore, in CLLs that
were directly observed to undergo genetic diversiﬁcation and
evolution over time, stem cell-related genes with higher pro-
moter PDR also underwent demethylation over time. Thus,
increased stochastic variation may blur the lines between popu-
lations with different proliferative potentials and thus increase
Figure 7. Locally Disordered Methylation Is
Associated with Adverse Clinical Outcome
(A) Kaplan-Meier plot showing FFS time (failure
deﬁned as retreatment or death from the time of
ﬁrst therapy after RRBS analysis) in CLLs with
higher versus lower than average promoter PDR.
Note that the analysis could be performed only for
the 49 patients who received therapy after RRBS
sampling.
(B) Multivariate analysis for this association with
the addition of well-established poor outcome
predictors in CLL (IGHV unmutated status, del
[17p] and del[11q]), as well as with the addition of
the presence of a subclonal driver (including so-
matic copy number changes, sSNVs, and indels),
as previously described (Landau et al., 2013), to
the model.
See also Table S10.
Cancer Cell
Methylation Disorder and Intratumoral Heterogeneity
822
Cancer Cell 26, 813–825, December 8, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc.

the diversity of adaptive mechanisms available to the cell, a
hedging strategy for enhanced survival (Bala´ zsi et al., 2011).
A further extension of this model proposes that locally disorder
methylation enhances the evolutionary capacity of CLL by opti-
mizing the process of genetic diversiﬁcation. This framework
would necessitate coincidence of a novel somatic mutation
with an epigenetic state permissive to the propagation of the
new genotype to a progeny population. In cellular populations
with a preserved epigenetic landscape (Figure 8, top), the pro-
portion of cells capable of actively participating in the evolu-
tionary process is predicted to be small. On the other hand, in
a more malleable epigenetic landscape (Figure 8, bottom) as is
expected with a high level of locally disordered methylation, a
greater proportion of cells can give birth to new subclones.
This process would accelerate genetic evolution, provide a
greater adaptive capacity for the cancer population, and result
in adverse clinical outcome with therapy, as we saw in our CLL
cohort.
What is the basis of increased locally disordered methylation
in CLL? Although the exact mechanism remains to be fully eluci-
dated, we speculate that the considerably higher replication rate
in CLL compared with their normal differentiated counterparts
could contribute to accumulation of stochastic lapses in methyl-
ation inheritance in cancer cells, given the estimated error rate
of 0.08% to 4% for a given CpG per cell division (Bird, 2002;
Ushijima et al., 2003). This maybe further compounded by the
occurrence of genetic lesions in essential components of the
methylation machinery. In addition, the ﬁnding that locally disor-
der methylation in CLL tended to be highest in gene-poor and
late-replicating regions suggests that some genomic regions
exhibit even higher error rates, consistent with the previously
observed high cancer intersample methylation variability in these
regions (Hansen et al., 2011).
Our data suggest that evolution and diversity of DNA methyl-
ation in CLL result from stochastic events. This insight should
improve our model for background methylation changes in can-
Figure 8. Proposed Interaction between
Methylation Disorder and Clonal Evolution
A novel somatic mutation (depicted with lightning
bolts) would have to coincide with an epigenetic
state that will be permissive to the propagation of
the new genotype to a progeny population. In
a
cellular
population
with
limited
stochastic
methylation changes (top), the proportion of cells
that are therefore able to actively participate in the
evolutionary process is small. However, in a more
malleable epigenetic landscape, such as ex-
pected to result from a high level of locally disor-
dered methylation, a greater proportion of cells
can give birth to new subclones, increasing the
diversity and the adaptive capacity of the cancer
population, resulting in adverse clinical outcome
with therapy.
cer and allow more rigorous identiﬁcation
of positively selected methylated regions.
Locally disordered DNA methylation is
likely to have a similar role to genetic
instability, providing a mechanism for
cancer cells to ﬁnd superior evolutionary trajectories during
tumorigenesis and in response to therapy.
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Sample Acquisition
Peripheral blood samples were obtained from patients with CLL and healthy
adult volunteers. Informed consent on Dana-Farber Cancer Institute institu-
tional review board-approved protocols for genomic sequencing of patients’
samples was obtained prior to the initiation of sequencing studies. Genomic
DNA was extracted from CLL cells or normal B cell populations.
WGBS
WGBS was performed as described in Supplemental Experimental Pro-
cedures. Subsequently, CpG methylation calls were made using custom soft-
ware, excluding duplicate and low-quality reads. Previously published WGBS
data for two CLL samples and three normal B cell samples (Kulis et al., 2012)
were downloaded with permission and processed in identical fashion to the in-
house-produced WGBS libraries.
RRBS
RRBS was performed as described in Supplemental Experimental Proce-
dures. RRBS of primary diverse human tissue samples were previously re-
ported (http://www.roadmapepigenomics.org). Reads were aligned, and
methylation was determined using identical protocols to the rest of the
samples.
RNA-Seq
RNA-seq of CLL and normal B cell samples was performed as previously
described (Landau et al., 2013). For single-cell RNA-seq, the C1 Single-Cell
Auto Prep System (Fluidigm) was used to perform SMARTer (Clontech)
whole-transcriptome ampliﬁcation (WTA), on up to 96 individual cells per sam-
ple from four primary CLL patient samples. WTA products were then converted
to Illumina sequencing libraries using Nextera XT (Illumina) (Ramsko¨ ld et al.,
2012).
Statistical Analysis
Statistical analysis was performed with MATLAB (The MathWorks), R version
2.15.2 (R Foundation for Statistical Computing), and SAS version 9.2 (SAS
Institute). A complete description of the materials and methods is provided
in Supplemental Experimental Procedures. The CLL and normal B cell
Cancer Cell
Methylation Disorder and Intratumoral Heterogeneity
Cancer Cell 26, 813–825, December 8, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc.
823

sequencing data were deposited in the database of Genotypes and Pheno-
types (dbGaP) (phs000435.v2.p1) and the processed data deposited in
Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) (GSE58889).
ACCESSION NUMBERS
The GEO accession number for the data reported in this paper is GSE58889.
The dbGaP accession number for the sequencing data reported in this paper is
phs000435.v2.p1.
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental Information includes Supplemental Experimental Procedures,
six ﬁgures, and ten tables and can be found with this article online at http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ccell.2014.10.012.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
D.A.L, K.C., N.H., G.G., A.M., and C.J.W. conceived and designed the exper-
iments. D.A.L, P.B., H.G., L.W., D.K., W.Z., K.J.L., S.L., and A.G. performed the
experiments. D.A.L, K.C., M.Z., J.F., K.S., M.G., D.N., and P.V.K. analyzed the
data. Additional contribution to funding and sample collection and processing
was provided by C.S., L.G., E.S.L., S.M.F., and J.R.B. The paper was written
by D.A.L, K.C., A.M., and C.J.W.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank all members of the Broad Institute’s Biological Samples, Genetic
Analysis, and Genome Sequencing Platforms, who made this work possible
(NHGRI-U54HG003067). We thank Rahul Satija, Angela Brooks, Scott Carter
and Brad Bernstein for their valuable input and insights. We thank John Daley,
Suzan Lazo-Kallanian, Jonna Grimsby, and Niall Lennon for their assistance in
the single-cell RNA-seq. We thank Adam Kiezun for his guidance regarding
germline SNP detection and Michael Lawrence for the replication time data.
D.A.L. is supported by a Postdoctoral Fellowship from the American Cancer
Society (ACS) and by the NIH Big Data to Knowledge initiative (BD2K,
1K01ES025431-01). K.C. is supported by the National Science Foundation
Graduate Research Fellowship under Grant No. 112237. L.W. is supported
by a Lymphoma Research Foundation Postdoctoral Fellowship. J.F. is sup-
ported by the National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship
(DGE1144152). J.R.B. is a Scholar in Clinical Research of the Leukemia &
Lymphoma Society (LLS) and is supported by a LLS Translational Research
Program award as well as an ACS Research Scholar Grant and the Melton
and Rosenbach Funds. A.M. is a New York Stem Cell Foundation Robertson
Investigator and received support from NIH grants U01ES017155 and
1R01DA036898. C.J.W. is a Scholar of LLS and the recipient of a Quest for
Cures Award from LLS. She acknowledges support from the Blavatnik Family
Foundation, the American Association for Cancer Research (Stand Up to Can-
cer Innovative Research Grant), the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute
(1RO1HL103532-01), and the National Cancer Institute (1R01CA155010-
01A1). K.J.L. and S.L. are employees of Fluidigm Corporation.
Received: March 4, 2014
Revised: September 16, 2014
Accepted: October 24, 2014
Published: December 8, 2014
REFERENCES
Acevedo, L.G., Bieda, M., Green, R., and Farnham, P.J. (2008). Analysis of the
mechanisms mediating tumor-speciﬁc changes in gene expression in human
liver tumors. Cancer Res. 68, 2641–2651.
Akiyama, Y., Watkins, N., Suzuki, H., Jair, K.W., van Engeland, M., Esteller, M.,
Sakai, H., Ren, C.Y., Yuasa, Y., Herman, J.G., and Baylin, S.B. (2003). GATA-4
and GATA-5 transcription factor genes and potential downstream antitumor
target genes are epigenetically silenced in colorectal and gastric cancer.
Mol. Cell. Biol. 23, 8429–8439.
Bala´ zsi, G., van Oudenaarden, A., and Collins, J.J. (2011). Cellular decision
making and biological noise: from microbes to mammals. Cell 144, 910–925.
Baylin, S.B. (2005). DNA methylation and gene silencing in cancer. Nat. Clin.
Pract. Oncol. 2 (Suppl 1), S4–S11.
Baylin, S.B., and Jones, P.A. (2011). A decade of exploring the cancer epige-
nome - biological and translational implications. Nat. Rev. Cancer 11,
726–734.
Berman, B.P., Weisenberger, D.J., Aman, J.F., Hinoue, T., Ramjan, Z., Liu, Y.,
Noushmehr, H., Lange, C.P., van Dijk, C.M., Tollenaar, R.A., et al. (2012).
Regions of focal DNA hypermethylation and long-range hypomethylation in
colorectal cancer coincide with nuclear lamina-associated domains. Nat.
Genet. 44, 40–46.
Bird, A. (2002). DNA methylation patterns and epigenetic memory. Genes Dev.
16, 6–21.
Boquest, A.C., Shahdadfar, A., Frønsdal, K., Sigurjonsson, O., Tunheim, S.H.,
Collas, P., and Brinchmann, J.E. (2005). Isolation and transcription proﬁling of
puriﬁed uncultured human stromal stem cells: alteration of gene expression af-
ter in vitro cell culture. Mol. Biol. Cell 16, 1131–1141.
Boyle, P., Clement, K., Gu, H., Smith, Z.D., Ziller, M., Fostel, J.L., Holmes, L.,
Meldrim, J., Kelley, F., Gnirke, A., and Meissner, A. (2012). Gel-free multi-
plexed reduced representation bisulﬁte sequencing for large-scale DNA
methylation proﬁling. Genome Biol. 13, R92.
Brown, J.R., Hanna, M., Tesar, B., Werner, L., Pochet, N., Asara, J.M., Wang,
Y.E., Dal Cin, P., Fernandes, S.M., Thompson, C., et al. (2012). Integrative
genomic analysis implicates gain of PIK3CA at 3q26 and MYC at 8q24 in
chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Clin. Cancer Res. 18, 3791–3802.
Cahill, N., Bergh, A.C., Kanduri, M., Go¨ ransson-Kultima, H., Mansouri, L.,
Isaksson, A., Ryan, F., Smedby, K.E., Juliusson, G., Sundstro¨ m, C., et al.
(2013). 450K-array analysis of chronic lymphocytic leukemia cells reveals
global DNA methylation to be relatively stable over time and similar in resting
and proliferative compartments. Leukemia 27, 150–158.
Chim, C.S., Pang, R., and Liang, R. (2008). Epigenetic dysregulation of the Wnt
signalling pathway in chronic lymphocytic leukaemia. J. Clin. Pathol. 61, 1214–
1219.
De, S., Shaknovich, R., Riester, M., Elemento, O., Geng, H., Kormaksson, M.,
Jiang, Y., Woolcock, B., Johnson, N., Polo, J.M., et al. (2013). Aberration in
DNA methylation in B-cell lymphomas has a complex origin and increases
with disease severity. PLoS Genet. 9, e1003137.
Eckhardt, F., Lewin, J., Cortese, R., Rakyan, V.K., Attwood, J., Burger, M.,
Burton, J., Cox, T.V., Davies, R., Down, T.A., et al. (2006). DNA methylation
proﬁling of human chromosomes 6, 20 and 22. Nat. Genet. 38, 1378–1385.
Ehrlich, M. (2009). DNA hypomethylation in cancer cells. Epigenomics 1,
239–259.
Hanahan, D., and Weinberg, R.A. (2011). Hallmarks of cancer: the next gener-
ation. Cell 144, 646–674.
Hansen, K.D., Timp, W., Bravo, H.C., Sabunciyan, S., Langmead, B.,
McDonald, O.G., Wen, B., Wu, H., Liu, Y., Diep, D., et al. (2011). Increased
methylation variation in epigenetic domains across cancer types. Nat.
Genet. 43, 768–775.
Harris, R.A., Wang, T., Coarfa, C., Nagarajan, R.P., Hong, C., Downey, S.L.,
Johnson, B.E., Fouse, S.D., Delaney, A., Zhao, Y., et al. (2010). Comparison
of sequencing-based methods to proﬁle DNA methylation and identiﬁcation
of monoallelic epigenetic modiﬁcations. Nat. Biotechnol. 28, 1097–1105.
Inokuchi, K., Miyake, K., Takahashi, H., Dan, K., and Nomura, T. (1996). DCC
protein expression in hematopoietic cell populations and its relation to leuke-
mogenesis. J. Clin. Invest. 97, 852–857.
Jaatinen, T., Hemmoranta, H., Hautaniemi, S., Niemi, J., Nicorici, D., Laine, J.,
Yli-Harja, O., and Partanen, J. (2006). Global gene expression proﬁle of human
cord blood-derived CD133+ cells. Stem Cells 24, 631–641.
Jantus Lewintre, E., Reinoso Martı´n, C., Montaner, D., Marı´n, M., Jose´ Terol,
M., Farra´ s, R., Benet, I., Calvete, J.J., Dopazo, J., and Garcı´a-Conde, J.
(2009). Analysis of chronic lymphotic leukemia transcriptomic proﬁle: differ-
ences between molecular subgroups. Leuk. Lymphoma 50, 68–79.
Cancer Cell
Methylation Disorder and Intratumoral Heterogeneity
824
Cancer Cell 26, 813–825, December 8, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc.

Jones, P.A. (2012). Functions of DNA methylation: islands, start sites, gene
bodies and beyond. Nat. Rev. Genet. 13, 484–492.
Jones, P.A., and Baylin, S.B. (2007). The epigenomics of cancer. Cell 128,
683–692.
Kim, J., Woo, A.J., Chu, J., Snow, J.W., Fujiwara, Y., Kim, C.G., Cantor, A.B.,
and Orkin, S.H. (2010). A Myc network accounts for similarities between em-
bryonic stem and cancer cell transcription programs. Cell 143, 313–324.
Kreso, A., O’Brien, C.A., van Galen, P., Gan, O.I., Notta, F., Brown, A.M., Ng,
K., Ma, J., Wienholds, E., Dunant, C., et al. (2013). Variable clonal repopulation
dynamics inﬂuence chemotherapy response in colorectal cancer. Science
339, 543–548.
Kulis, M., Heath, S., Bibikova, M., Queiro´ s, A.C., Navarro, A., Clot, G.,
Martı´nez-Trillos, A., Castellano, G., Brun-Heath, I., Pinyol, M., et al. (2012).
Epigenomic analysis detects widespread gene-body DNA hypomethylation
in chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Nat. Genet. 44, 1236–1242.
Landan, G., Cohen, N.M., Mukamel, Z., Bar, A., Molchadsky, A., Brosh, R.,
Horn-Saban, S., Zalcenstein, D.A., Goldﬁnger, N., Zundelevich, A., et al.
(2012). Epigenetic polymorphism and the stochastic formation of differentially
methylated regions in normal and cancerous tissues. Nat. Genet. 44, 1207–
1214.
Landau, D.A., Carter, S.L., Stojanov, P., McKenna, A., Stevenson, K.,
Lawrence, M.S., Sougnez, C., Stewart, C., Sivachenko, A., Wang, L., et al.
(2013). Evolution and impact of subclonal mutations in chronic lymphocytic
leukemia. Cell 152, 714–726.
Landau, D.A., Carter, S.L., Getz, G., and Wu, C.J. (2014). Clonal evolution in
hematological malignancies and therapeutic implications. Leukemia 28,
34–43.
Lawrence, M.S., Stojanov, P., Polak, P., Kryukov, G.V., Cibulskis, K.,
Sivachenko, A., Carter, S.L., Stewart, C., Mermel, C.H., Roberts, S.A., et al.
(2013). Mutational heterogeneity in cancer and the search for new cancer-
associated genes. Nature 499, 214–218.
Ley, T.J., Ding, L., Walter, M.J., McLellan, M.D., Lamprecht, T., Larson, D.E.,
Kandoth, C., Payton, J.E., Baty, J., Welch, J., et al. (2010). DNMT3A mutations
in acute myeloid leukemia. N. Engl. J. Med. 363, 2424–2433.
Lim, E., Wu, D., Pal, B., Bouras, T., Asselin-Labat, M.L., Vaillant, F., Yagita, H.,
Lindeman, G.J., Smyth, G.K., and Visvader, J.E. (2010). Transcriptome ana-
lyses of mouse and human mammary cell subpopulations reveal multiple
conserved genes and pathways. Breast Cancer Res. 12, R21.
Maegawa, S., Gough, S.M., Watanabe-Okochi, N., Lu, Y., Zhang, N., Castoro,
R.J., Estecio, M.R., Jelinek, J., Liang, S., Kitamura, T., et al. (2014). Age-related
epigenetic drift in the pathogenesis of MDS and AML. Genome Res. 24,
580–591.
Meissner, A., Mikkelsen, T.S., Gu, H., Wernig, M., Hanna, J., Sivachenko, A.,
Zhang, X., Bernstein, B.E., Nusbaum, C., Jaffe, D.B., et al. (2008). Genome-
scale DNA methylation maps of pluripotent and differentiated cells. Nature
454, 766–770.
Menke, A.L., Clarke, A.R., Leitch, A., Ijpenberg, A., Williamson, K.A.,
Spraggon, L., Harrison, D.J., and Hastie, N.D. (2002). Genetic interactions be-
tween the Wilms’ tumor 1 gene and the p53 gene. Cancer Res. 62, 6615–6620.
Morison, I.M., Ramsay, J.P., and Spencer, H.G. (2005). A census of mamma-
lian imprinting. Trends Genet. 21, 457–465.
Ohnishi, K., Semi, K., Yamamoto, T., Shimizu, M., Tanaka, A., Mitsunaga, K.,
Okita, K., Osafune, K., Arioka, Y., Maeda, T., et al. (2014). Premature termina-
tion of reprogramming in vivo leads to cancer development through altered
epigenetic regulation. Cell 156, 663–677.
Pei, L., Choi, J.H., Liu, J., Lee, E.J., McCarthy, B., Wilson, J.M., Speir, E.,
Awan, F., Tae, H., Arthur, G., et al. (2012). Genome-wide DNA methylation
analysis reveals novel epigenetic changes in chronic lymphocytic leukemia.
Epigenetics 7, 567–578.
Perez, C.A., Ott, J., Mays, D.J., and Pietenpol, J.A. (2007). p63 consensus
DNA-binding site: identiﬁcation, analysis and application into a p63MH algo-
rithm. Oncogene 26, 7363–7370.
Pujadas, E., and Feinberg, A.P. (2012). Regulated noise in the epigenetic land-
scape of development and disease. Cell 148, 1123–1131.
Ramsko¨ ld, D., Luo, S., Wang, Y.C., Li, R., Deng, Q., Faridani, O.R., Daniels,
G.A., Khrebtukova, I., Loring, J.F., Laurent, L.C., et al. (2012). Full-length
mRNA-Seq from single-cell levels of RNA and individual circulating tumor
cells. Nat. Biotechnol. 30, 777–782.
Raval, A., Tanner, S.M., Byrd, J.C., Angerman, E.B., Perko, J.D., Chen, S.S.,
Hackanson, B., Grever, M.R., Lucas, D.M., Matkovic, J.J., et al. (2007).
Downregulation of death-associated protein kinase 1 (DAPK1) in chronic lym-
phocytic leukemia. Cell 129, 879–890.
Rossi, D., Rasi, S., Spina, V., Bruscaggin, A., Monti, S., Ciardullo, C.,
Deambrogi, C., Khiabanian, H., Serra, R., Bertoni, F., et al. (2013). Integrated
mutational and cytogenetic analysis identiﬁes new prognostic subgroups in
chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Blood 121, 1403–1412.
Sato, N., Fukushima, N., Maitra, A., Matsubayashi, H., Yeo, C.J., Cameron,
J.L., Hruban, R.H., and Goggins, M. (2003). Discovery of novel targets for aber-
rant methylation in pancreatic carcinoma using high-throughput microarrays.
Cancer Res. 63, 3735–3742.
Shalek, A.K., Satija, R., Shuga, J., Trombetta, J.J., Gennert, D., Lu, D., Chen,
P., Gertner, R.S., Gaublomme, J.T., Yosef, N., et al. (2014). Single-cell RNA-
seq reveals dynamic paracrine control of cellular variation. Nature 510,
363–369.
Shipony, Z., Mukamel, Z., Cohen, N.M., Landan, G., Chomsky, E., Zeliger,
S.R., Fried, Y.C., Ainbinder, E., Friedman, N., and Tanay, A. (2014). Dynamic
and static maintenance of epigenetic memory in pluripotent and somatic cells.
Nature 513, 115–119.
Siegmund, K.D., Marjoram, P., Woo, Y.J., Tavare´ , S., and Shibata, D. (2009).
Inferring clonal expansion and cancer stem cell dynamics from DNA methyl-
ation patterns in colorectal cancers. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 106, 4828–
4833.
Spencer, S.L., Gaudet, S., Albeck, J.G., Burke, J.M., and Sorger, P.K. (2009).
Non-genetic origins of cell-to-cell variability in TRAIL-induced apoptosis.
Nature 459, 428–432.
Timp, W., and Feinberg, A.P. (2013). Cancer as a dysregulated epigenome al-
lowing cellular growth advantage at the expense of the host. Nat. Rev. Cancer
13, 497–510.
Ushijima, T., Watanabe, N., Okochi, E., Kaneda, A., Sugimura, T., and
Miyamoto, K. (2003). Fidelity of the methylation pattern and its variation in
the genome. Genome Res. 13, 868–874.
Widschwendter, M., Fiegl, H., Egle, D., Mueller-Holzner, E., Spizzo, G., Marth,
C., Weisenberger, D.J., Campan, M., Young, J., Jacobs, I., and Laird, P.W.
(2007). Epigenetic stem cell signature in cancer. Nat. Genet. 39, 157–158.
Wong, D.J., Liu, H., Ridky, T.W., Cassarino, D., Segal, E., and Chang, H.Y.
(2008). Module map of stem cell genes guides creation of epithelial cancer
stem cells. Cell Stem Cell 2, 333–344.
Yuille, M.R., Condie, A., Stone, E.M., Wilsher, J., Bradshaw, P.S., Brooks, L.,
and Catovsky, D. (2001). TCL1 is activated by chromosomal rearrangement or
by hypomethylation. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 30, 336–341.
Ziller, M.J., Gu, H., Mu¨ ller, F., Donaghey, J., Tsai, L.T., Kohlbacher, O., De
Jager, P.L., Rosen, E.D., Bennett, D.A., Bernstein, B.E., et al. (2013).
Charting a dynamic DNA methylation landscape of the human genome.
Nature 500, 477–481.
Cancer Cell
Methylation Disorder and Intratumoral Heterogeneity
Cancer Cell 26, 813–825, December 8, 2014 ª2014 Elsevier Inc.
825

Cancer Cell, Volume 26 
 
Supplemental Information 
 
 
Locally Disordered Methylation Forms  
the Basis of Intratumor Methylome Variation 
in Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia 
Dan A. Landau, Kendell Clement, Michael J. Ziller, Patrick Boyle, Jean Fan, Hongcang 
Gu, Kristen Stevenson, Carrie Sougnez, Lili Wang, Shuqiang Li, Dylan Kotliar, Wandi 
Zhang, Mahmoud Ghandi, Levi Garraway, Stacey M. Fernandes, Kenneth J. Livak, Stacey 
Gabriel, Andreas Gnirke, Eric S. Lander, Jennifer R. Brown, Donna Neuberg, Peter V. 
Kharchenko, Nir Hacohen, Gad Getz, Alexander Meissner, and Catherine J. Wu 

 
2	  
SUPPLEMENTAL DATA 
Table S1, related to Figure 1. Characteristics and mean promoter PDR of the 104 CLL patients 
whose DNA were analyzed by WES and RRBS. 
 
N (%) 
Mean 
Promoter 
PDR 
(SD) 
p 
value† 
N 
104 
 
 
Age (median = 54yrs) 
 
 
 
      <54 yrs. 
46 (44) 
0.101 (0.016) 
0.15 
      ≥54 yrs. 
58 (56) 
0.105 (0.016) 
 
Sex 
 
 
 
      Female 
38 (37) 
0.106 (0.016) 
0.30 
      Male   
66 (63) 
0.102 (0.016) 
 
Rai Stage at Sample 
 
 
 
     0-1 
78 (75) 
0.102 (0.016) 
0.049 
     2-4 
26 (25) 
0.109 (0.015) 
 
Treatment Status at time of 
 
 
 
         Chemotherapy naïve 
82 (79) 
0.103 (0.017) 
0.59 
         Prior Treatment 
22 (21) 
0.105 (0.014) 
 
IGHV status 
 
 
 
        Mutated 
57 (55) 
0.107 (0.017) 
0.035 
        Not Mutated 
34 (33) 
0.0996 
 
        Unknown 
13 (13) 
0.0977 
 
ZAP 70
 
 
 
FISH Cytogenetics††  
 
 
 
          del(13q) present  
67 (67) 
0.105 (0.016) 
0.059 
                        absent 
33 (33) 
0.099 (0.016) 
 
          Trisomy 12 present  
18 (18) 
0.099 (0.015) 
0.21 
                        absent 
82 (82) 
0.104 (0.016) 
 
          del(11q) present  
18 (18) 
0.095 (0.013) 
0.019 
                        absent 
82 (82) 
0.105 (0.016) 
 
          del(17p) present  
14 (14) 
0.105 (0.016) 
0.62 
                        absent 
86 (86) 
0.103 (0.016) 
 
Mutational Status 
 
 
 
         Subclonal Mutation Present 
49 (47) 
0.105 (0.016) 
0.25 
                   Absent 
55 (53) 
0.102 (0.016) 
 
         TP53 Present 
15 (14) 
0.110 (0.016) 
0.091 
                   Absent 
89 (86) 
0.102 (0.016) 
 
         NOTCH1Present 
11 (11) 
0.096 (0.016) 
0.097 
                   Absent 
93 (89) 
0.104 (0.016) 
 
         SF3B1Present 
9 (9) 
0.108 (0.015) 
0.36 
                   Absent 
 95 (90) 
0.103 (0.016) 
 
         MYD88 Present 
8 (8) 
0.111 (0.009) 
0.19 
                   Absent 
96 (92) 
0.103 (0.016) 
 
         ATM Present 
6 (6) 
0.112 (0.017) 
0.18 
                   Absent 
98 (94) 
0.103 (0.016) 
 
†Testing excludes unknown categories; Welch t-test (variances were not significantly 
different)               ††N=100 

 
3	  
Table S2, related to Figure 1. Sample annotation and sequencing metrics for RRBS, WGBS and 
RNAseq data. Provided as an Excel file.  
 
 
 
 
 

 
4	  

 
5	  
 

 
6	  
 

 
7	  
Figure S1, related to Figure 1: WGBS and RRBS data from CLLs and normal B cells shows 
higher Intratumoral DNA methylation heterogeneity that arises from locally disordered 
methylation.  A-C (top). The genome was divided into 1KB tiles. The analysis was limited to tiles 
that contained at least 5 CpGs covered with greater than 5 reads. The scatter plots enable the 
examination of the methylation patterns consistency of the two B cell samples (A), and the two 
CLL samples (B). Note that the somewhat decreased methylation in CLL007 perhaps results from 
the DNMT3A nonsense mutation affecting this tumor. A comparison between the average 
methylation values across the genome in CLL and normal B cells is also shown (C). A-C (bottom). 
The proportion of genomic 1KB tiles with intermediate values is compared between CLL and 
normal B cells. D. The percentage of methylation values falling within each category (0-0.2, 0.2-
0.6, 0.6-1.0) is shown for the 4 WGBS samples for different genomic features.  Number of CpGs  
per sample per feature (mean [range]): Promoters – 1,737,131 [1,728,620-1,747,890], CG islands 
– 2,031,560 [2,025,376-2,044,203], enhancers – 865,820 [860,997-870,134], exons – 1,489,549 
[1,483,138-1,493,987], introns – 6,691,529 [6,599,956-6,739,995] and repeat elements – 
7,301,495 [7,163,887-7,368,831]. E. Reanalysis of WGBS data (Kulis et al., 2012) for the 
frequency of CpGs with intermediate methylation in CLL samples compared with B cells from 
healthy adult volunteers. Shown are cumulative distributions of CpG methylation values in 
unmutated IGHV CLL compared with naive B cells (left), as well as for mutated IGHV CLL vs. 
memory B cells (cs – class switched) (middle). The intratumoral DNA methylation heterogeneity in 
CLL from discordant reads (solid line) versus concordant reads (dashed) (right, analysis of WGBS 
data from CLL169). F. Histograms of individual normal B cell samples (blue) show bimodal 
distribution in methylation values as measured by DNA 450K methylation arrays (Kulis et al., 
2012), while CLL samples (red) show more CpGs with intermediate methylation values, diverging 
from a pure bimodal distribution.  G-H. Violin plots comparing the proportion of intermediate 
methylation values from 450K array data (Kulis et al.(Kulis et al., 2012)) from 127 CLL samples 
and 26 normal B cell samples (beta methylation values between 0.35 and 0.65, average ± SEM, 
13.7 ± 0.002% vs. 10.1 ± 0.01%, respectively, p = 5 x 10−8, Wilcoxon rank sum test). I. While 
overall purity of the CLL samples was consistently high (median of 90.2%), contaminating non-
malignant cells in samples may contribute to the PDR, we therefore compared the PDR in CLL 
samples with high vs. low tumor purity (above and below the overall average; 86.6%). J. 
Stochastic disorder in methylation patterns is expected to yield discordant reads that involve both 
parental alleles in a given locus (in contrast to an allele-specific methylation (ASM) phenomenon). 
We therefore measured the proportion of germline SNPs for which a discordant read is found to 
involve both parental alleles (Y axis). As expected, with an increasing number of discordant reads 
in the studied locus (X axis), the proportion of SNPs with a discordant read involving both parental 
alleles increases and converges towards 1. K. Even within a given genotype, different methylation 
patterns were seen. For example, in the left most panel, 3 distinct methylation patterns are seen to 
affect both the A genotype parental allele and the G genotype parental allele.  L. We measured the 
number of distinct discordant methylation patterns found in each locus (similar to a previous 
analysis (Landan et al., 2012)). Presence of 1 or 2 patterns of discordancy across all reads 
covered for a particular locus would be expected of ASM. The plot shows the distribution of the 
number of methylation patterns in loci with 10-20 discordant reads across 10 randomly selected 
CLL and normal B cell samples. The distribution shows that there are generally more than 2 
discordant methylation patterns per locus for both normal (blue) and CLL (red) samples.  In 
addition, the high number of distinct methylation profiles per locus excludes also the possibility that 
PDR arises from reads that cover an ordered transition point from one methylation state to 
another. The shaded distribution (grey) shows the number of distinct patterns if the state of CpG 
methylation was purely random (with equal frequencies of the number of reads as in the 
experimental data). The finding that the measured distribution demonstrates less distinct patterns 
than purely random is consistent with inheritance of discordant patterns to progeny cells. M. To 
assess for possible amplification biases, the allelic frequencies of germline SNP not involving 

 
8	  
CpGs was measured and shows a tight distribution around 0.5 compatible with limited amplification 
biases. N. To assess for possible amplification biases, the methylation of imprinted control regions 
was measured and shows a tight distribution around 0.5 compatible with limited amplification 
biases. O. Similar PDR values are seen in regions of somatic copy number variations (sCNV) in 
the two CLLs that underwent WGBS (CLL169 and CLL007), both for promoter CpGs (top) and for 
all CpGs (bottom).  
 

 
9	  
Table S3, related to Figure 2. Average number of CpGs covered by RRBS with 4 or more CpGs 
per read, and read depth greater than 10, given by genomic feature.  
 
Genomic 
feature 
 
CLL samples 
 
 
Normal B cell samples 
 
Total # of CpGs 
in the human 
genome 
Mean 
Standard 
Dev. 
Mean 
Standard 
Dev. 
Promoters 
129212.20 
81086.22 
163485.80 
107845.00 
1954610 
CpG islands 
171342.80 
108393.30 
215941.40 
143384.80 
2124041 
Exons 
71536.45 
45162.34 
83029.35 
54823.08 
1954610 
Enhancers 
92322.87 
62354.34 
91093.69 
62145.70 
1176256 
Introns 
155736.40 
102363.70 
164236.30 
110325.50 
14479789 
Genes 
29397.06 
18483.37 
34193.31 
22639.84 
26917396 
LTR 
14222.88 
9679.65 
9102.58 
6533.52 
2133049 
LINE 
5256.03 
3754.65 
3055.23 
2309.95 
3516060 
Shores 
2488.20 
1755.74 
2349.08 
1801.29 
3886809 
Shelves 
3094.95 
2403.47 
4682.19 
3636.86 
1259327 
Intergenic 
35881.12 
26900.36 
18867.27 
15753.56 
5087650 
 
 

 
10	  
 
 

 
11	  
Figure S2, related to Figure 2. Genomic characterization of locally disordered methylation 
including analysis of CpG island subtypes and repeat elements based on WGBS. A. 
Increase in PDR with concomitant increase in methylation in 104 CLLs compared to 26 B cell 
samples affects all 3 major categories of CpG islands (CGIs: promoters, intragenic, other).  B. 
WGBS based analysis of the 2 CLL samples (CLL007 and CLL169), compared with 2 normal B 
cell samples (Normal_CD19_1 and Normal_IGD_3) showing increased PDR in repeat elements 
concomitant with decreased methylation. Comparison between PDR and methylation values 
individually between each CLL sample and each normal B cell sample yielded a statistically 
significant difference (p < 1 x 10−32). C. The three of 104 CLL samples with nonsilent mutations in 
methylation modulators (DNMT3A-Q153*, TET1-N789I, IDH1-S210N) revealed high average PDR 
by RRBS compared to samples with wildtype alleles for these genes.  
 

 
12	  

 
13	  
Figure S3, related to Figure 3. Locally disordered methylation in CLL is consistent with a 
stochastic process. A. As an additional measure of methylation disorder in individual reads, we 
calculated Shannon’s information entropy (Shannon, 1948) for intra-sample methylation variation. 
Information entropy was calculated for each read and then averaged across all reads for each CpG 
as shown. B. Increased average Shannon’s information entropy was observed in CLL and cancer 
cell line samples compared with normal B cells and primary healthy diverse human tissue samples, 
demonstrating an increase in stochastic methylation variation. C. An increase in information 
entropy is seen across all measured regions in RRBS data from CLL samples (red) compared with 
B cells from healthy adult volunteers (blue). Error bars indicate upper 95% CI. Relative increase in 

 
14	  
average entropy from B cells to CLL samples and p value for Wilcoxon rank sum test are shown. 
D. Analysis of outlier genes falling outside of the expected distribution of PDR in relation to 
methylation level. Left panels – Outlier genes (black) were identified by the Tukey method in which 
promoter CGI PDR was lower then expected given the methylation level. Right panel - the 
comparative location of selected gene promoters in CLL (red) compared with normal B cells (blue). 
This plot highlights the considerable CLL hypermethylation without a significant concomitant 
change in PDR in tumor suppressor genes (WIF1, DCC, DUSP22; solid circles). In contrast, 
imprinted genes (empty circles, e.g., GNAS) show relative little difference between CLL and 
normal B cells. E. Scatter plots for methylation and PDR values were generated for a CLL sample 
(CLL169) and a normal B cell sample (Normal_CD19_1). Values were calculated for each element 
(enhancers, promoter CGIs, exons, introns, LINE family repeat elements and LTR family repeat 
elements) as long as at least 20 evaluable CpGs were contained in the specific element, with at 
least 4 CpG per read and read depth >10 (‘unfiltered’). The same data were analyzed with filtering 
such that only CpGs covered by reads with 4-6 CpGs per read (similar to RRBS data) were 
examined (second row), or such that a more stringent criteria on the number of evaluable CpGs 
(>100) per evaluated element was used. Together the plots follow the same distribution of PDR to 
methylation values suggestive of a stochastic change in methylation (Figure 3A). F. A scatter plot 
for methylation and PDR values for promoter CGIs utilizing RRBS data (CLL007 compared with 
Normal_IGD_2). G. Similar distribution can be seen for the methylation and PDR values of 
promoter regions of the key tumor suppressor genes DAPK1 and WT1 across CLL samples. H. 
The strong correlation between average promoter CGI PDR and methylation across 104 CLL 
samples in shown separately for 3 groups of genes, arranged according to their average 
methylation values across 104 CLLs (0-0.1, left; 0.1-0.5, center; 0.5-1.0, right). 
 

 
15	  
Table S4, related to Figure 3. 195 outlier genes identified by the Tukey method (i.e., PDR lower 
than 1.5 times the IQR below the lowest quartile for the methylation value bin), based on CLL169 
WGBS data (please see Figure S3D). Provided as an Excel file.  
    

 
16	  
Figure S4, related to Figure 4. The association between PDR and distance from somatic 
mutation is similar for clonal and subclonal mutations. A. To study the specificity of the PDR 
increase in the previously defined hypomethylated blocks (Hansen et al., 2011), we identified size, 
GC and repeat content matched regions at random from the genome. Of these regions, we 
retained only those that harbored more than 1000 CpGs each (covered with greater than 10 reads 
and 4 or more CpGs per read in the CLL169 and Normal_CD19_1 WGBS data). Compared to the 
control genomic regions, the hypomethylated blocks exhibit higher PDR in both CLL and normal B 
cells, as well as a greater increase in CLL compared to the normal B cells. To assess for a 
relationship between somatic mutations and PDR, somatic single nucleotide variants (sSNVs) 
were identified with WGS of CLL169 and matched germline DNA. Subsequently, sSNVs with 
sufficient read depth (>40) were classified as clonal (n=866) or subclonal (n= 602) based on the 
allelic frequency (above or below 0.2, respectively, analysis limited to sSNVs with greater than 40 
reads and that do not involve sCNVs to enhance the confidence in the clonal vs. subclonal 
classification). Average PDR (B) and methylation (C) were measured in 1000bp increments from 
each somatic mutation. Values for each 1000bp bin were averaged over sSNVs, and plotted as a 
function of the distance from the somatic mutation. Red lines -- the LOWESS (locally weighted 
scatterplot smoothing).  
 

 
17	  
 

 
18	  
 

 
19	  
Figure S5, related to Figure 5. Locally disordered methylation is linked to transcriptional 
variation A. Genes were divided into 9 bins according to their mean expression over 33 samples 
(starting from 0, and then in increments of 1 until 9; log2[FPKM+1]). PDR is shown for each bin in 
boxplots, demonstrating that PDR is highest in genes with low expression values (bottom). The 
number of genes in each expression bin is shown (top). B. Density scatter plot of mean promoter 
methylation in relation to mean expression (log2(FPKM+1)), showing that these features are 
negatively correlated. 8,570 genes were evaluated that had promoter RRBS coverage in at least 
70% of 33 samples with matched RRBS and RNAseq. C. An example is shown of the promoter 
region of ZNF718 from two samples (CLL062 and CLL074) with similar promoter methylation 
values but different PDR and different expression as measured by RNAseq (bottom right). ZNF718 
promoter RRBS reads for CLL062 and CLL074 are shown (top). The number of concordantly 
methylated (grey background) or discordantly methylated (orange background) sequencing reads 
for each distinct methylation pattern is indicated to the right of each read pattern. D. Gene 
expression Shannon’s information entropy (y-axis) in relation to the population average gene 
expression (x-axis, log10[FPM]) for each gene covered in single cells of CLL032, CLL096 and 
CLL146, evaluated by single cell transcriptome sequencing. Colored lines - local regression curves 
for genes with low PDR (0-0.05, blue), intermediate PDR (0.05 – 0.2, purple), and high PDR (0.2-
1.0, red). 90% of genes with higher promoter PDR (PDR >0.1) have lower population average 
expression (bounded by the yellow highlighted line). Right panels - Boxplots of the gene 
expression Shannon’s information entropy for each of the three PDR bins for genes with 
population average gene expression of 1.0-1.5 (to control for differences in this variable). E. 
Generalized additive regression tests that model gene expression Shannon’s information entropy 
based on: PDR, population average gene expression (locally smoothed), transcript length and 
promoter methylation across the 4 CLL samples that underwent single-cell transcriptome 
sequencing. 
 

 
20	  
Table S5, related to Figure 5. Promoter PDR and methylation values for 104 CLLs as well as 
gene expression data from RNAseq of bulk RNA from 33 CLLs. These data were utilized in the 
linear models for prediction of expression based on methylation information. Provided as an Excel 
file.  

 
21	  
Table S6, related to Figure 5. Results of models of prediction of gene expression for 33 CLL 
samples with matched RNAseq and RRBS: Values represent the adjusted R squared for the 
model.  
 
Sample 
PDR+Meth+Cp
G_content 
+Repeat_conte
nt 
Meth 
PDR 
Meth+PDR 
Genes 
measured 
per sample 
CLL146 
0.223 
0.087 
0.210 
0.210 
6110 
CLL124 
0.170 
0.068 
0.160 
0.161 
7016 
CLL131 
0.168 
0.062 
0.155 
0.156 
7264 
CLL170 
0.191 
0.080 
0.179 
0.179 
7636 
CLL097 
0.213 
0.073 
0.192 
0.193 
8511 
CLL141 
0.222 
0.089 
0.217 
0.217 
8818 
CLL117 
0.285 
0.128 
0.276 
0.276 
8926 
CLL140 
0.196 
0.088 
0.182 
0.182 
9005 
CLL096 
0.222 
0.093 
0.209 
0.209 
9016 
CLL003 
0.237 
0.118 
0.226 
0.226 
9044 
CLL041 
0.231 
0.104 
0.220 
0.220 
9045 
CLL074 
0.217 
0.086 
0.208 
0.208 
9566 
CLL120 
0.215 
0.099 
0.203 
0.203 
9871 
CLL138 
0.268 
0.133 
0.255 
0.256 
9914 
CLL129 
0.221 
0.093 
0.206 
0.206 
9976 
CLL068 
0.248 
0.112 
0.235 
0.235 
10029 
CLL038 
0.117 
0.038 
0.100 
0.101 
10058 
CLL062 
0.163 
0.066 
0.143 
0.143 
10141 
CLL105 
0.226 
0.074 
0.211 
0.211 
10311 
CLL119 
0.239 
0.128 
0.232 
0.232 
10351 
CLL100 
0.230 
0.115 
0.221 
0.221 
10387 
CLL153 
0.256 
0.132 
0.247 
0.248 
10426 
CLL069 
0.205 
0.082 
0.196 
0.196 
10600 
CLL123 
0.189 
0.069 
0.182 
0.182 
10655 
CLL067 
0.242 
0.116 
0.230 
0.230 
10684 
CLL057 
0.237 
0.110 
0.227 
0.228 
10745 
CLL128 
0.171 
0.068 
0.158 
0.158 
10750 
CLL054 
0.208 
0.083 
0.198 
0.198 
10755 
CLL152 
0.219 
0.096 
0.210 
0.210 
10828 
CLL007 
0.210 
0.101 
0.199 
0.199 
10883 
CLL126 
0.203 
0.075 
0.181 
0.181 
11051 
CLL005 
0.218 
0.111 
0.202 
0.203 
11064 
CLL049 
0.193 
0.086 
0.180 
0.180 
11138 
 

 
22	  
Figure S6, related to figure 6. Increased locally disordered methylation involves 
differentially methylated regions and affects stem cell related genes. A. Two sets of 
differentially methylated CpG islands and promoter regions were identified by comparing 
methylation across: i) unmutated IGHV CLL vs. normal naive B cell samples, and ii) across 
mutated IGHV CLL vs. normal memory B cell samples. Significantly differentially methylated 
regions were defined as having a >10% average methylation change with a t-test p value < 0.01. 
Average PDR was then calculated for each one of these regions. Higher PDR was measured in 
differentially methylated (both increased and decreased methylation) promoters and CpG islands 
compared with regions that are not differentially methylated between CLL and normal B cells 
(Wilcoxon rank sum test). B. Average promoter PDR is highest in promoters of 115 genes up-
regulated in stromal stem cells compared with 102 genes down-regulated in stromal stem cells 
(Boquest et al., 2005) as well as the average for 8,353 genes without a differential expression in 
stem cells (all comparisons by Wilcoxon rank sum test). Boxes represent median and interquartile 
range (IQR). Whiskers represent 1.5 times IQR.   
 
 

 
23	  
Table S7, related to Figure 6. Gene set enrichments of genes with promoters with consistently 
high PDR across 104 CLL samples (top 30 enrichments shown).  
 
Gene Set Name 
Qhigh 
Qhighvslowl 
ZWANG_TRANSIENTLY_UP_BY_2ND_EGF_PULSE_ONLY 
5.55E-52 
2.89E-28 
YOSHIMURA_MAPK8_TARGETS_UP 
1.73E-43 
5.92E-11 
ACEVEDO_METHYLATED_IN_LIVER_CANCER_DN 
4.91E-22 
3.32E-10 
LIM_MAMMARY_STEM_CELL_UP 
5.42E-38 
3.32E-10 
SATO_SILENCED_BY_METHYLATION_IN_PANCREATIC_CAN
CER_1 
1.98E-28 
2.00E-09 
MCBRYAN_PUBERTAL_BREAST_4_5WK_UP 
4.44E-25 
2.23E-08 
DURAND_STROMA_MAX_UP 
1.11E-25 
2.23E-08 
LIU_PROSTATE_CANCER_DN 
3.43E-27 
2.25E-07 
ONDER_CDH1_TARGETS_2_UP 
8.01E-21 
1.78E-06 
SCHUETZ_BREAST_CANCER_DUCTAL_INVASIVE_UP 
5.67E-16 
5.10E-06 
WU_CELL_MIGRATION 
1.44E-13 
6.49E-05 
SMID_BREAST_CANCER_RELAPSE_IN_BONE_DN 
2.06E-14 
9.04E-05 
MIKKELSEN_ES_ICP_WITH_H3K4ME3 
1.47E-06 
9.04E-05 
SERVITJA_ISLET_HNF1A_TARGETS_UP 
2.34E-13 
1.19E-04 
WONG_ADULT_TISSUE_STEM_MODULE 
1.52E-36 
1.28E-04 
ACEVEDO_LIVER_CANCER_WITH_H3K27ME3_DN 
5.36E-12 
1.65E-04 
MIYAGAWA_TARGETS_OF_EWSR1_ETS_FUSIONS_DN 
1.17E-16 
1.67E-04 
SMID_BREAST_CANCER_LUMINAL_B_DN 
1.50E-12 
1.71E-04 
RIGGI_EWING_SARCOMA_PROGENITOR_UP 
3.68E-23 
2.14E-04 
SCHAEFFER_PROSTATE_DEVELOPMENT_48HR_DN 
3.02E-23 
2.55E-04 
MARTORIATI_MDM4_TARGETS_NEUROEPITHELIUM_DN 
9.08E-15 
2.73E-04 
VART_KSHV_INFECTION_ANGIOGENIC_MARKERS_UP 
4.12E-11 
2.73E-04 
SCHAEFFER_PROSTATE_DEVELOPMENT_48HR_UP 
1.90E-22 
2.93E-04 
KATSANOU_ELAVL1_TARGETS_UP 
1.37E-09 
3.65E-04 
MOHANKUMAR_TLX1_TARGETS_DN 
4.84E-11 
3.79E-04 
PEREZ_TP63_TARGETS 
4.83E-25 
6.73E-04 
BRUINS_UVC_RESPONSE_VIA_TP53_GROUP_A 
6.89E-26 
6.73E-04 
GOZGIT_ESR1_TARGETS_DN 
1.42E-25 
7.30E-04 
YAUCH_HEDGEHOG_SIGNALING_PARACRINE_UP 
6.46E-10 
1.16E-03 
YAUCH_HEDGEHOG_SIGNALING_PARACRINE_DN 
2.31E-09 
1.33E-03 
 
 
 
 

 
24	  
 
Table S8, related to Figure 6. Clinical characteristics of 14 patients for whom longitudinal 
samples were studied. 
 
CLL IDs 
Ag
e 
Therapy 
IGHV 
mutatio
n status 
Geneti
c 
evoluti
on 
ZAP7
0 
status 
FISH 
Cytogenet
ics 
Years 
between 
samples 
Prior to 
timepoint 
1 
Between 
timepoints 1 
& 2 
CLL018 
71 
None 
None 
Y 
N 
- 
del(13q) 
2.4 
CLL020 
54 
None 
None 
Y 
N 
+ 
del(13q) 
2.5 
CLL019 
52 
None 
None 
Y 
Y 
- 
del(13q) 
3.2 
CLL030 
54 
None 
None 
Y 
N 
+ 
del(13q) 
3.5 
CLL011 
41 
None 
FCR 
N 
Y 
+ 
del(13q) 
5 
CLL088 
60 
None 
FCR, Alem+R 
N 
Y 
- 
tri12 
4.5 
CLL169 
69 
None 
FR 
Y 
Y 
+ 
del(13q) 
4.7 
CLL167 
56 
None 
FR 
Y 
Y 
- 
del(13q),tri
12 
2.7 
CLL016 
59 
None 
FR 
N 
Y 
+ 
del(13q) 
3.4 
CLL001 
58 
None 
FR 
N 
Y 
+ 
del(11q, 
13q) 
3.5 
CLL006 
67 
FC, 
Chloram 
Alem+R, FR, 
exp. 
N 
Y 
- 
del(13q),de
l(11q) 
4.6 
CLL014 
65 
R 
FR 
Y 
N 
- 
del(13q) 
2.9 
CLL066 
70 
FR, 
Chloram 
R-CVP 
Y 
N 
- 
del(13q) 
3.5 
CLL040 
60 
FCR 
FCR, Alem+R 
N 
Y 
+ 
del(13q),de
l(11q) 
3 
Abbreviations: Y- Yes, N- No, Mut.- Mutated, FISH-Fluorescence In Situ Hybridization, F- 
Fludarabine, C- Cyclophosphamide, R-Rituximab, V-Vincristine, Chloram- Chlorambucil, Alem – 
Alemtuzumab; Rev – Revlimid; exp - experimental  
 
 
 
 

 
25	  
 
Table S9, related to Figure 6. Gene set enrichments of genes with significant promoter 
methylation changes over time (top 30 enrichments for demethylation and methylation are shown). 
Gene Set Name 
Qhigh 
Qhigh vs. 
genes with 
no change 
Methyla-
tion 
change 
MEISSNER_BRAIN_HCP_WITH_H3K4ME3_AND_H3K27ME3 
1.82E-17 
3.42E-22 
decrease 
BENPORATH_SUZ12_TARGETS 
3.76E-15 
9.10E-21 
decrease 
BENPORATH_ES_WITH_H3K27ME3 
4.89E-14 
4.70E-19 
decrease 
PEREZ_TP53_TARGETS 
2.45E-11 
3.96E-17 
decrease 
ACEVEDO_METHYLATED_IN_LIVER_CANCER_DN 
3.16E-08 
4.60E-17 
decrease 
BENPORATH_EED_TARGETS 
4.47E-12 
7.05E-17 
decrease 
DODD_NASOPHARYNGEAL_CARCINOMA_UP 
5.63E-08 
2.73E-16 
decrease 
MIKKELSEN_MCV6_HCP_WITH_H3K27ME3 
6.78E-12 
1.06E-14 
decrease 
SMID_BREAST_CANCER_BASAL_DN 
3.88E-09 
3.35E-14 
decrease 
MEISSNER_NPC_HCP_WITH_H3K4ME2_AND_H3K27ME3 
6.78E-12 
4.87E-14 
decrease 
MIKKELSEN_MEF_HCP_WITH_H3K27ME3 
7.35E-11 
5.53E-14 
decrease 
ZWANG_TRANSIENTLY_UP_BY_2ND_EGF_PULSE_ONLY 
9.93E-05 
2.06E-13 
decrease 
JAATINEN_HEMATOPOIETIC_STEM_CELL_UP 
6.96E-10 
2.83E-13 
decrease 
WONG_ADULT_TISSUE_STEM_MODULE 
6.82E-09 
2.89E-13 
decrease 
BENPORATH_PRC2_TARGETS 
6.96E-10 
6.13E-13 
decrease 
MEISSNER_NPC_HCP_WITH_H3K4ME2 
3.91E-10 
1.28E-12 
decrease 
LIM_MAMMARY_STEM_CELL_UP 
5.58E-09 
2.10E-12 
decrease 
MIKKELSEN_NPC_HCP_WITH_H3K27ME3 
6.18E-10 
4.62E-12 
decrease 
GOZGIT_ESR1_TARGETS_DN 
1.56E-06 
1.56E-11 
decrease 
ONDER_CDH1_TARGETS_2_UP 
1.99E-08 
2.55E-11 
decrease 
CUI_TCF21_TARGETS_2_DN 
1.62E-07 
6.88E-11 
decrease 
MEISSNER_BRAIN_HCP_WITH_H3K27ME3 
3.98E-08 
1.52E-09 
decrease 
ZWANG_TRANSIENTLY_UP_BY_1ST_EGF_PULSE_ONLY 
1.70E-03 
1.91E-09 
decrease 
DACOSTA_UV_RESPONSE_VIA_ERCC3_DN 
3.23E-06 
8.12E-09 
decrease 
CHYLA_CBFA2T3_TARGETS_UP 
3.83E-05 
2.48E-08 
decrease 
CHEN_METABOLIC_SYNDROM_NETWORK 
5.55E-04 
3.21E-08 
decrease 
LEE_BMP2_TARGETS_UP 
5.39E-05 
5.16E-08 
decrease 
MEISSNER_NPC_HCP_WITH_H3_UNMETHYLATED 
7.13E-06 
6.43E-08 
decrease 
LIU_PROSTATE_CANCER_DN 
5.55E-05 
7.34E-08 
decrease 
GOBERT_OLIGODENDROCYTE_DIFFERENTIATION_DN 
9.93E-05 
1.08E-07 
decrease 
MEISSNER_BRAIN_HCP_WITH_H3K4ME3_AND_H3K27ME3 
1.82E-17 
3.42E-22 
decrease 
 

 
26	  
 
 
Gene Set Name 
Qhigh 
Qhigh vs. 
genes with 
no change 
Methyla-
tion 
change 
BENPORATH_SUZ12_TARGETS 
1.49E-19 
2.99E-25 
increase 
BENPORATH_ES_WITH_H3K27ME3 
2.27E-18 
2.05E-23 
increase 
MEISSNER_BRAIN_HCP_WITH_H3K4ME3_AND_H3K27ME3 
4.03E-18 
6.63E-22 
increase 
BENPORATH_EED_TARGETS 
3.55E-15 
1.21E-19 
increase 
MIKKELSEN_MCV6_HCP_WITH_H3K27ME3 
5.84E-14 
2.80E-16 
increase 
DODD_NASOPHARYNGEAL_CARCINOMA_UP 
6.53E-08 
1.40E-15 
increase 
BENPORATH_PRC2_TARGETS 
1.72E-11 
3.77E-14 
increase 
MEISSNER_NPC_HCP_WITH_H3K4ME2 
7.06E-12 
5.84E-14 
increase 
MIKKELSEN_MEF_HCP_WITH_H3K27ME3 
2.32E-11 
6.76E-14 
increase 
MEISSNER_NPC_HCP_WITH_H3K4ME2_AND_H3K27ME3 
4.49E-10 
2.21E-11 
increase 
ZWANG_TRANSIENTLY_UP_BY_2ND_EGF_PULSE_ONLY 
7.57E-04 
7.91E-11 
increase 
MARTENS_TRETINOIN_RESPONSE_UP 
1.48E-05 
1.04E-10 
increase 
GOZGIT_ESR1_TARGETS_DN 
8.29E-06 
6.73E-10 
increase 
SCHAEFFER_PROSTATE_DEVELOPMENT_48HR_UP 
9.59E-07 
7.99E-10 
increase 
MEISSNER_NPC_HCP_WITH_H3_UNMETHYLATED 
9.09E-08 
8.06E-10 
increase 
LEE_BMP2_TARGETS_UP 
1.01E-06 
8.06E-10 
increase 
CHEMNITZ_RESPONSE_TO_PROSTAGLANDIN_E2_DN 
1.71E-06 
6.84E-09 
increase 
ZWANG_TRANSIENTLY_UP_BY_1ST_EGF_PULSE_ONLY 
2.06E-03 
8.66E-09 
increase 
MEISSNER_BRAIN_HCP_WITH_H3K27ME3 
1.84E-07 
1.31E-08 
increase 
BLALOCK_ALZHEIMERS_DISEASE_UP 
1.40E-04 
2.97E-08 
increase 
MIKKELSEN_NPC_HCP_WITH_H3K27ME3 
1.01E-06 
6.16E-08 
increase 
SMID_BREAST_CANCER_BASAL_UP 
8.09E-05 
7.55E-08 
increase 
GRAESSMANN_APOPTOSIS_BY_DOXORUBICIN_UP 
7.07E-05 
1.05E-07 
increase 
DAWSON_METHYLATED_IN_LYMPHOMA_TCL1 
9.59E-07 
1.68E-07 
increase 
WONG_ENDMETRIUM_CANCER_DN 
1.16E-05 
2.55E-07 
increase 
BRUINS_UVC_RESPONSE_VIA_TP53_GROUP_A 
5.02E-04 
2.68E-07 
increase 
GINESTIER_BREAST_CANCER_ZNF217_AMPLIFIED_DN 
1.48E-05 
3.12E-07 
increase 
CREIGHTON_ENDOCRINE_THERAPY_RESISTANCE_5 
3.55E-05 
3.62E-07 
increase 
MARTINEZ_TP53_TARGETS_DN 
1.91E-04 
9.25E-07 
increase 
BENPORATH_SUZ12_TARGETS 
1.49E-19 
2.99E-25 
increase 
BENPORATH_ES_WITH_H3K27ME3 
2.27E-18 
2.05E-23 
increase 

 
27	  
Table S10, related to Figure 7. Stepwise regression model for prediction of clinical outcome.  
 
Unadjusted 
HR [95% CI] 
Stepwise selection 
Final model (without 
subclonal driver) 
HR [95% CI] 
Stepwise selection 
Final model 
(including subclonal 
driver as candidate) 
HR [95% CI] 
Promoter PDR: 
cutpoint at the Mean 
> 0.1033 vs. ≤0.1033 
2.51 [1.10-5.17] 
p=0.029 
3.48 [1.37-8.86] 
p =0.009 
 
IGVH Mutated vs. 
Unmutated 
0.29 [0.11-0.77] 
p =0.013 
0.16 [0.05-0.47] 
p =0.0009 
0.20 [0.07-0.58] 
p =0.003 
Presence of del11q  
1.26 [0.55-2.86] 
p =0.58 
 
 
Presence of del17p 
3.46 [1.39-8.62] 
p =0.008 
2.51 [0.84-7.51] 
p =0.10 
3.24 [0.99-10.54] 
p =0.051 
Presence of a 
subclonal driver 
4.80 [1.79-12.92] 
p =0.002 
NA 
6.54 [2.16-19.86] 
p =0.0009 
Promoter methylation: 
cutpoint at mean 
>0.0735 vs. ≤ 0.0735 
1.81 [0.83-3.99] 
p =0.14 
 
 
Mutation number: 
cutpoint at mean > 
18.8 vs. ≤ 18.8 
1.89 [0.85-4.23] 
p =0.012 
2.57 [1.04-6.35] 
p =0.040 
3.42 [1.39-8.39] 
p =0.007 

 
28	  
SUPPLEMENTAL EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES 
 
Human samples: Heparinized blood samples were obtained from patients and healthy adult 
volunteers enrolled on clinical research protocols at the Dana-Farber/Harvard Cancer Center 
(DF/HCC), approved by the DF/HCC Human Subjects Protection Committee. The diagnosis of 
CLL according to WHO criteria was confirmed in all cases by flow cytometry, or by lymph node 
or bone marrow biopsy. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) from normal donors and 
patients were isolated by Ficoll/Hypaque density gradient centrifugation. Mononuclear cells were 
cryopreserved with FBS/10% DMSO and stored in vapor-phase liquid nitrogen until the time of 
analysis. The patients included in the cohort represent the broad clinical spectrum of CLL 
(Table S1). Informed consent on DFCI IRB-approved protocols for genomic sequencing of 
patients’ samples was obtained prior to the initiation of sequencing studies. 
 
Established CLL prognostic factor analysis: Immunoglobulin heavy-chain variable (IGHV) 
homology (unmutated was defined as greater than or equal to 98% homology to the closest 
germline match) and ZAP-70 expression (high risk defined as >20% positive) were determined 
(Rassenti et al., 2008). Cytogenetics were evaluated by FISH for the most common CLL 
abnormalities (del(13q), trisomy 12, del(11q), del(17p), all probes from Vysis, Des Plaines, IL, 
performed at the Brigham and Women’s Hospital Cytogenetics Laboratory, Boston MA). 
Samples were scored positive for a chromosomal aberration based on consensus cytogenetic 
scoring (Smoley et al., 2010).   
 
DNA isolation from CLL and normal B-cell subpopulations: Genomic DNA was extracted 
from CLL cells or normal B cell populations utilizing the ROCHE DNA Isolation Kit (Roche 
Applied Science, Indianopolis, IN). Control CD19+ B cell samples were isolated from buffy coats 
of healthy adult volunteers using a two-step enrichment procedure. B cells were first enriched 
using the RosetteSep Human B cell Enrichment System (StemCell Technologies Inc., 
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada) and then further purified by immunomagnetic bead 
selection (CD19+ beads, Miltenyi Biotec, Cambridge, MA). From these purified CD19+ cells, 
naive B cells (CD19+CD27−IgD+) and memory B cells (CD19+CD27+IgD-) were isolated by flow 
cytometric sorting (FACSAria II, BD Biosciences) using CD27-PC5 (Beckman Coulter, Brea, 
CA) and IgD-CY7 (Biolegend, San Diego, CA) antibodies. Standard protocols for DNA quality 
control for genomic studies were applied, as recently described (Berger et al., 2011; Chapman 
et al., 2011; Landau et al., 2013).  
 
Reanalysis of whole-exome DNA sequencing (WES) data from CLL samples: We re-
analyzed WES from 104 of 160 previously reported CLLs and their matched germline samples 
(Landau et al., 2013), deposited in dbGaP (phs000435.v2.p1). Details of whole-exome library 
construction and analysis have been detailed elsewhere (Fisher et al., 2011; Landau et al., 
2013). Briefly, output from Illumina software (Illumina, San Diego, CA) was processed by the 
“Picard” data processing pipeline to yield BAM files containing aligned reads with well-calibrated 
quality scores (Chapman et al., 2011; DePristo et al., 2011). Somatic alterations were 
identified using a set of tools within the “Firehose” pipeline, developed at the Broad Institute 
(www.broadinstitute.org/cancer/cga) (Berger et al., 2011; Chapman et al., 2011). Somatic 
single nucleotide variations (sSNVs) were detected using MuTect (Cibulskis et al., 2013). We 
used the ABSOLUTE algorithm to calculate the purity, ploidy, and absolute DNA copy-numbers 
of each sample (Carter et al., 2012) and clonal/subclonal status of each alteration inferred 
using a probabilistic approach (Escobar and West, 1995; Landau et al., 2013). We note that 

 
29	  
the spectrum of mutations in these samples was consistent with prior publications (Quesada et 
al., 2012), with C>T transitions constituting the most frequent sSNVs (average of 41.8 ± 15% of 
all sSNV across all 104 CLL WES analyzed in this study). There was no significant correlation 
between the proportion per sample of any specific subtype of sSNV and PDR (-0.1 < r < 0.1, p > 
0.3).  
 
Whole Genome Sequencing of CLL sample CLL169 and CLL007: Library construction was 
performed using 1–3 micrograms of native DNA from primary tumor (peripheral blood) and 
germline (saliva) samples. The DNA was sheared to a range of 101–700 bp using the Covaris 
E210 Instrument and was then phosphorylated and adenylated according to the Illumina 
protocol. Adaptor ligated purification was done by preparatory gel electrophoresis, and size was 
selected by excision of two bands (500–520 bp and 520–540 bp, respectively), yielding two 
libraries per sample with average of 380 bp and 400 bp, respectively. The libraries were then 
sequenced with the Illumina GA-II or Illumina HiSeq sequencer with 76 or 101 bp reads, 
achieving an average of ~30X coverage depth. The resulting data were analyzed with the 
current Illumina pipeline, which generates data files (BAM files) that contain the reads and 
quality 
parameters. 
Sequencing 
data 
are 
available 
in 
the 
dbGaP 
database 
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gap) under accession number phs000435.v2.p1. Somatic single 
nucleotide variations (sSNVs) were detected using MuTect (Cibulskis et al., 2013). Replication 
times were adopted from Chen et al. (Chen et al., 2010). S50 values (for a defined genome 
region, S50 corresponds to the fraction of the S phase at which 50% of the sequence reads that 
map in this region were obtained) were rescaled to vary from 100 (early) to 1000 (late) as 
previously described (Lawrence et al., 2013). Although replication times reported by Chen et 
al., were not measured directly in CLL cells or B cells, previous studies have shown that 
replication time is fairly consistent across different cell types (Karnani et al., 2007). 
Furthermore, Chen and colleagues confirmed a high correlation with previously measured 
replication time in other cell types including human lymphocytes. 
 
RNA-sequencing of CLL samples and analysis: 5mg of total RNA was poly-A selected using 
oligo-dT beads to extract the desired mRNA, and used to construct dUTP libraries as previously 
described (Landau et al., 2013).  Samples were pooled and sequenced using either 76 or 
101bp paired end reads. RNAseq BAMs were aligned to the hg19 genome using the TopHat 
suite. FPKM values were generated with the Cufflinks suite (http://cufflinks.cbcb.umd.edu/). 
These data are deposited in dbGaP (phs000435.v2.p1). 
RRBS: Genomic DNA from CLL samples, normal B cell samples and cancer cell line samples 
were used to produce RRBS libraries. These were generated by digesting genomic DNA with 
MspI to enrich for CpG-rich fragments, and then were ligated to barcoded TruSeq adapters 
(Illumina) to allow immediate subsequent pooling. This was followed by bisulfite conversion and 
PCR, as previously described (Boyle et al., 2012). Libraries were sequenced and 29mers were 
aligned to the hg19 genome using MAQ version 0.6.6 (Li et al., 2008). Reads were further 
filtered if: i) The read did not align to an autosome, ii) The read failed platform/vendor quality 
checks (samtools flag 0x200), and/or iii) the read did not align to an MspI cut site.  
The methylation state of each CpG was determined by comparing bisulfite-treated reads 
aligning to that CpG with the genomic reference sequence. The methylation level was computed 
by dividing the number of observed methylated cytosines (which did not undergo bisulfite 
conversion) by the total number of reads aligned to that CpG (Figure 1E). In addition, the 
number of CpG measurements on each read was noted. In order to identify locations in the 
genome where concordant methylation (in either methylated or unmethylated states) occurs, we 

 
30	  
devised a measure called the Proportion of Discordant Reads (PDR). This measure can be 
computed for a specific genomic location or for the entire genome.  After reads are aligned to 
the reference genome, the methylation state of each CpG on a read is determined. If all the 
CpGs on a specific read are methylated, or all of the CpGs on a read are unmethylated, the 
read is classified as concordant; otherwise it is classified as discordant. At each CpG, the PDR 
is equal to the number of discordant reads that cover that location divided by the total number of 
reads that cover that location (Figure 1E). The PDR across the entire genome or for a specified 
genomic region is given by averaging the values of individual CpGs, as calculated for all CpGs 
within the region of interest with read depth greater than 10 reads and that are covered by reads 
that contain at least 4 CpGs. It is important to note that PDR and variances were also calculated 
with means weighted by depth of coverage of a particular CpG with consistently similar results. 
For example, overall variance weighted by the number of read depth per CpG shows similar 
difference in variance of 0.0696 [0.0679- 0.0714] for CLL samples, vs. 0.0437 [0.0399- 0.0475] 
for normal B cell samples (p = 2.61 x 10-13). Weighted average of PDR for CLL samples was 
0.2476 [0.2431- 0.2520] vs. 0.1402 [0.1275-0.1528] for normal B cell samples (p = 1.06 x 10-14). 
The CLL and normal B cell RRBS raw data are deposited in dbGaP (phs000435.v2.p1), and 
processed data format files containing PDR and methylation values for each CpG evaluated in 
the CLL and normal B cell samples are deposited in GEO (GSE58889). RRBS of primary 
diverse human tissue samples were previously reported (http://www.roadmapepigenomics.org). 
Reads were realigned and methylation was determined using identical protocols to the rest of 
the samples.  
WGBS: Genomic DNA was fragmented to 100–500  bp fragments using a Covaris S2 sonicator 
(Woburn, MA). DNA fragments were cleaned-up, end-repaired, A-tailed and ligated with 
methylated paired-end adapters (from ATDBio, Southampton, UK). Libraries were sequenced 
and WGBS reads were aligned using BSMAP version 2.7 (Xi and Li, 2009) to the 
hg19/GRCh37 reference assembly. Subsequently, CpG methylation calls were made using 
custom software, excluding duplicate, low-quality reads, as well as reads with more than 10% 
mismatches. We note that as previously reported (Kulis et al., 2012), non-CpG methylation 
levels were minimal (0.08% in both CLL samples). Only CpGs covered by  > 10 reads were 
considered for further analysis. A methylation-calling pipeline was implemented in Perl and 
determines CpG methylation state by observing bisulfite conversion at read locations aligned to 
a CpG in the reference genome. Previously published WGBS data for 2 CLL samples and 3 
normal B cell samples (Kulis et al., 2012) were downloaded with permission from the European 
Genome-Phenome Archive. The raw sequencing reads were processed in identical fashion to 
the in-house produced WGBS libraries. Additional processing steps for WGBS reads included 
trimming by 4bp to ensure high data quality, and filtering out reads that: i) did not align to an 
autosome, ii) failed platform/vendor quality checks (samtools flag 0x200), iii) had poor alignment 
score (samtools flag 0x2), iv) had poor alignment of the read mate (samtools flag 0x8), v) 
aligned to the same location as another read (read duplicate), or vi) contained nucleotides at a 
CpG location that could not have been produced by bisulfite conversion. The determination of 
the concordant vs. discordant classification was performed in identical fashion as with RRBS 
reads. The CLL and normal B cell WGBS data are deposited in dbGaP (phs000435.v2.p1), and 
processed data format files containing PDR and methylation values for each CpG evaluated in 
the sample are deposited in GEO (GSE58889). Table S2 contains a list of all the samples 
evaluated in this study along with the source of data and measurement type annotation.  
Methylation array analysis:  Data for previously published 450K methylation arrays (Kulis et 
al., 2012) were downloaded with permission from the European Genome-Phenome Archive. 
Data from the 450k Human Methylation Array were analyzed by GenomeStudio (Illumina) and R 
using the lumi package available through Bioconductor. 

 
31	  
 
Single cell RNA-Sequencing of CLL samples: Four primary cryopreserved peripheral blood 
CLL samples were thawed and stained with anti-CD19 FITC and anti-CD5 PE antibodies 
(Beckman Coulter, Indianapolis, IN). 7-AAD (Invitrogen, Grand Island, NY) was added before 
FACS sorting as a viability control. Live CD19+CD5+ tumor cells were preliminarily sorted into a 
collection tube. Subsequently, the bulk cell concentration was adjusted to 250 cell/ml and 
applied to the C1 Single-Cell Auto Prep System for single cell capture with a 5-10 micron chip 
(Fluidigm, San Francisco, CA). The capture rate was measured at > 80%. Following capture, 
whole transcriptome amplification (WTA) was immediately performed using the C1 Single-Cell 
Auto Prep System with the SMARTer Kit (Clontech, Mountain View, CA) on up to 96 individual 
cells. The C1 WTA products were then converted to Illumina sequencing libraries using Nextera 
XT (Illumina). RNA-Seq was performed on a MiSeq instrument (Illumina). 
Analysis of single-cell RNA-seq data: Paired-ended reads were aligned against UCSC hg19 
human annotation (March 6, 2013 version) using Tophat 2.0.10 (Kim et al., 2013), and read 
counts for each gene were determined using HTSeq 0.5.4 (Anders et al., 2014). A subset of 
cells with more than 10,000 total reads across all genes was selected for further analysis (73-
87% of cells). To determine population average gene expression (performed separately for each 
of the 4 primary CLL samples), the read counts observed in each cell were normalized by the 
effective library size, determined by edgeR (Robinson et al., 2010) ‘calcNormFactors’ method. 
To test for significance of association of PDR with expression heterogeneity, first the fraction of 
positive cells (fpc) was calculated per gene (a cell is defined as positive if  > 0 reads aligned to 
the gene). Subsequently, Shannon’s information entropy (ent) was calculated ent = [-1 x  (fpc x 
log2(fpc) + (1-fpc) x log2(1-fpc)]. The association with PDR was tested using generalized 
additive models (implemented by gam R package). The following types of models were tested:  
• 
ent ~ s(population average expression) + PDR  + transcript length 
• 
ent ~ s(population average expression) + PDR  + transcript length + methylation 
where s() indicates local regression. The population average expression values were entered 
into the models on log10 scale (adding 1). 
 
Genome annotations definitions: Promoters were defined as 1 Kb upstream and 1 Kb 
downstream of hg19 Refgene gene transcription start sites (TSSs). The set of CpG Islands 
(CGIs) were defined using biologically-verified CGIs (Illingworth et al., 2010). Enhancer 
regions were defined as the union of the 'Distal Regulatory Modules' class from all cell types as 
previously identified (Ramskold et al., 2012). CTCF binding sites were annotated based on 
published CTCF binding ChIP-seq experiments using 27 healthy donor transformed B cells 
ChIP-seq experiments (Wang et al., 2012). We curated a list of CTCF binding sites based on 
sites that were detected in at least 75% of these B cell samples, and then calculated the CTCF 
binding site per megabase across the human genome. The location of repeat elements was 
identified 
based 
on 
the 
RepBase 
database 
version 
18.09 
for 
hg19 
(http://www.girinst.org/server/archive/RepBase18.09/). Hypomethylated regions in embryonic 
stem cells were defined as previously described (Ziller et al., 2013), and the analysis was 
limited to regions with at least 20 CpGs. Differentially-methylated regions (DMRs) were called 
using a two-sample t-test with significance of p < 0.01 and in which the difference between the 
weighted average region methylation levels was greater than 10%. Well-covered regions with 
at least 5 CpGs in at least 80% of the samples were used for the analysis, as previously 
described (Bock et al., 2011).  
 

 
32	  
Summary statistics of methylation across DMRs between CLL and normal B cells. 
DMR category 
 
 
 
Mean methylation 
 
Standard deviation 
 
Number of 
elements 
 
CLL 
Normal B 
cells 
CLL 
Normal B 
cells 
Promoters 
hypermethylated in IGHV 
mutated CLL 
3.06E-
01 
1.71E-01 
1.51E-01 
1.40E-01 
213 
Promoters hypomethylated 
in IGHV mutated CLL 
4.95E-
01 
6.40E-01 
2.11E-01 
2.02E-01 
28 
CGIs hypomethylated in 
IGHV mutated CLL t 
4.01E-
01 
5.54E-01 
3.08E-01 
2.97E-01 
41 
CGIs hypermethylated in 
IGHV mutated CLL 
3.27E-
01 
1.87E-01 
1.61E-01 
1.51E-01 
558 
CGIs hypomethylated in 
IGHV unmutated CLL 
4.70E-
01 
6.69E-01 
3.15E-01 
2.81E-01 
115 
CGIs hypermethylated in 
IGHV unmutated CLL 
2.84E-
01 
1.24E-01 
1.63E-01 
1.55E-01 
817 
Promoters hypomethylated 
in IGHV unmutated CLL 
5.57E-
01 
7.11E-01 
2.55E-01 
2.56E-01 
145 
Promoters 
hypermethylated in IGHV 
unmutated CLL 
2.59E-
01 
1.02E-01 
1.53E-01 
1.42E-01 
332 
 
Modeling locally disordered methylation: In order to describe the expected PDR for a given 
set of reads covering the same set of CpGs, we developed a model to describe the likelihood of 
finding a certain number of discordant reads, given a methylation value for the set of reads. The 
input parameters for our model were the number of CpGs covered by the reads, the average 
methylation value of the covered CpGs, and the number of reads covering the CpGs. We 
modeled the methylation state of each CpG on each read as an independent Bernoulli trial, with 
the probability of getting a methylated CpG being set to the overall empirical methylation 
average. The probability of seeing a specified number of discordant reads was then unity minus 
the probability of observing a specified number of concordant reads (a probability derived 
directly from the independent Bernoulli trials for each CpG).  
Using this model, we were able to predict the maximum likelihood for PDR for a set of reads 
covering a certain number of CpGs, with a certain methylation value. In addition to finding the 
maximum likelihood PDR, we were able to assign a P-value for the probability of finding a 
specified number of discordant reads, given the number of CpGs covered by the reads, the 
average methylation value, and the total number of reads. We plotted the 99% confidence 
interval using this model in Figure 3A. 
Germline variants detection for allele-specific analyses: Germline variants were detected 
using the UnifiedGenotyper in the Genome Analysis Toolkit (http://www.broadinstitute.org/gatk/), 
using default options, followed by the filtering of SNPs using Variant Quality Score 
Recalibration, and hard-filtering of indels (DePristo et al., 2011; McKenna et al., 2010). 
Germline 
variants 
were 
annotated 
using 
SeattleSeq137 
(http://snp.gs.washington.edu/SeattleSeqAnnotation137/).  
 

 
33	  
Excluding alternative explanations for high PDR other than locally disordered 
methylation: We considered several possible alternative explanations to these findings. First, 
the contaminating non-malignant cell fraction of samples may contribute to the PDR, even 
though the overall purity of the CLL samples was consistently high (90.2% median purity). 
However, when we compared samples with purity above and below the overall average 
(86.6%), PDR was higher in the former (mean ± SEM, 0.2259 ± 0.0047 vs. 0.2062 ± 0.0066, t-
test p =0.009), indicating that indeed the malignant cells in the samples contribute to the high 
PDR (Figure S1I). Second, we considered the possibility that elevated PDR may affect only one 
allele in the sample as part of allele-specific methylation (ASM). To test this, we identified 
germline SNPs that did not involved CpGs across 53 randomly selected CLL samples in the 
cohort. Of these germline SNPs, 4,486 had equivalent coverage of both genotypes in the RRBS 
reads (ratio of 0.4-0.6 in variant reads/total reads). At these sites, discordant reads were found 
to contain both alternative genotypes in an increasing proportion of SNPs in association with an 
increased total number of discordant reads per locus (Figure S1J), converging towards 1. This 
result demonstrates that locally disordered methylation likely affects both parental alleles. 
Furthermore, even within a given genotype different discordancy patterns were seen (Figure 
S1K), revealing that high PDR results indeed from locally disordered methylation and not simply 
from allele-specific methylation patterns. In this context, it is important to note that X/Y 
chromosomes were excluded from the entire analysis.  
In addition to the germline variants, we carried out a similar analysis with regards to somatic 
single nucleotide mutations, by integrating WGS and WGBS data for CLL007 and CLL169. After 
excluding C>T mutations, and limiting the analysis to regions with >4 CpGs per read on average 
(to ensure accurate estimation of PDR) and to mutations with >20X coverage in the WGS (to 
ensure accurately distinguishing clonal vs. subclonal events), we identified 52 and 66 high 
confidence mutations for analysis, respectively (91% and 79% of these mutations were either 
intronic or intergenic mutations in CLL007 and CLL169, respectively). The correlation between 
the average methylation values of the clonally mutated alleles and the matching germline alleles 
was high (CLL169  - number of clonal mutations evaluated = 30, r = 0.96, p = 1.9 x 10-17, 
CLL007 - number of clonal mutations evaluated = 10, r = 0.94, p = 3.6 x 10-5). Similarly, the 
correlation between the PDR of the clonally mutated alleles and the matched germline alleles 
was also high (CLL169: r = 0.72, p = 5.6 x 10-7; CLL007: r = 0.65, p = 0.04). While the 
correlation of average methylation values remained high between the mutated alleles and the 
matched germline alleles for subclonal mutations (CLL169  - number of subclonal mutations 
evaluated = 36, r = 0.47, p = 0.008, CLL007 - number of subclonal mutations evaluated = 42, r = 
0.81, p = 5.3 x 10-11), the correlation between the PDR values of the two alleles was lower (r = 
0.09 and 0.45, p = 0.5 and p = 0.002, respectively), with a trend towards higher PDR in the 
mutated subclonal allele (20.5% and 34.6% increase in PDR in mutated alleles, for CLL169 and 
CLL007, respectively, with p = 0.2 and 0.048). Collectively, these data show that disordered 
methylation involved both the mutant and germline alleles, with a trend towards higher PDR in 
subclonally mutated alleles. 
Moreover, if high PDR results from ASM, then we would expect to find predominately 1 or 2 
consistent patterns of discordancy, across all reads covered for a particular locus. However, a 
histogram of the number of distinct discordancy pattern in loci that have a significant number of 
discordant reads (10-20) across ten randomly selected CLL samples, shows a normal 
distribution centered at 5 discordant patterns, consistent with a model of stochastic disorder 
rather than ASM (Figure S1L). This latter finding also confirms that most of the PDR does not 
result from reads that cover an ordered transition point from one methylation state to another, 
which is also expected to yield 1 recurrent discordancy pattern.  
 

 
34	  
Another potential explanation for increased PDR could be related to methQTL (Gibbs et al., 
2010). This is unlikely to account for the genome-wide pervasive process we describe for the 
following reasons: i) this effect is expected to be of importance in a tumor with a high mutation 
load. However, CLL is a malignancy with one of the lowest mutational loads, 1000-2000 
mutations per genome (Wang et al., 2011). Extrapolating from the study by Gibbs et al., which 
evaluated ~1.5M germline SNPs and only found association with 4-5% of CpGs, the mutational 
load in CLL at best will only affect 0.005% of CpGs. This is expected to have a small effect in 
comparison to the pervasive disorder in methylation patterns (e.g., in CLL169 WGBS, 73.39% of 
CpGs have PDR >0.1). ii) Cancer cell lines, which harbor 1-3 orders of magnitude more somatic 
mutations than primary CLLs, harbor marginally higher rates of PDR. iii) Finally, the PDR 
pattern would more likely result from methQTLs of subclonal mutations, as clonal mutations 
would behave largely like germline SNPs and therefore are unlikely to result in increase in PDR 
in cancer vs. normal tissue, given their number in the CLL genome. To assess for the 
confounding effect of methQTL on PDR, which may be related to subclonal mutations, we 
compared the correlation to PDR between clonal mutations and subclonal mutations and found 
that the distance from clonal mutations shows a stronger negative correlation to PDR, compared 
to the distance from subclonal mutations (Figure S4B-C). Although methQTL may have long-
range effects, at least a third supposedly act in cis (defined in Gibbs et al., as <1MB). These 
results, therefore, are not consistent with a significant impact of methQTL. 
  
Finally, technical artifacts were also considered as a potential cause of locally disordered 
methylation. Incomplete bisulfite conversion is an unlikely explanation for these findings as 
bisulfite conversion rates were high in both CLL and normal B cell samples (average of 99.66% 
and 99.72%, respectively) as measured by the rate of unmethylated cytosines in a non-CpG 
context (Bock et al., 2005). Furthermore, incomplete conversion is expected to decrease PDR 
preferentially in highly methylated region, however, we observed an increase in PDR in CLLs in 
regions with both low and high methylation.  
PCR amplification biases in the RRBS procedure are not likely to contribute significantly to this 
result. First, we have no reason to expect differential impact on CLL samples and normal B 
cells. Second, the consistency of the finding in WGBS where duplicate reads were discarded 
makes this technical bias an unlikely source for locally disordered methylation. Indeed the 
Pearson’s correlation of PDR in promoter CpGs covered by both RRBS and WGBS at >30X 
was high (CLL169; r= 0.856, CLL007; r = 0.855, and Normal_IGD_3; r=0.737).  Finally, given 
that we have no reason to expect duplicate reads to affect concordant reads less than 
discordant reads, duplicate reads are expected to decrease PDR, as the overall number of 
concordant reads is higher than discordant reads (87.1 ± 2% of RRBS reads evaluated are 
concordant, evaluated in randomly selected 5 samples (CLL003, CLL005, CLL006_TP1, 
CLL001_TP1 and CLL001_TP2).  To quantify PCR amplification biases, we measured the ratio 
of reads for each of the heterozygous SNP and found a similar representation of both parental 
alleles (Figure S1M). In addition, measured methylation values for germline Imprinted Control 
Regions (ICRs) (Woodfine et al., 2011) and found that these loci approximated 50% 
methylation, as expected (Figure S1N).  
 
Finally, although CLL genomes are mostly diploid (Brown et al., 2012), and therefore the 
analysis is not expected to be significantly impacted by somatic copy number variations 
(sCNV), we examined the PDR in regions of sCNV in WGBS of CLL007 and CLL169. Altogether 
in these tumors, 4 sCNVs were detected (using SNP array analysis as described previously 
(Landau et al., 2013)). As shown in Figure S1O, both the overall PDR and the promoter PDR 
do not differ substantially in the sCNVs compared to the remainder of the genome.  
 

 
35	  
Gene set enrichment analysis: Gene set enrichment analysis was limited to the C2 gene set 
collection (Subramanian et al., 2005). To assess gene set enrichments in genes that exhibit 
consistently elevated PDR (greater than mean promoter PDR of 0.1 in >75% of 104 CLL 
samples) a Fisher’s exact test was used to measure the enrichment of these genes in each 
gene-set, followed by a Benjamini-Hochberg FDR procedure. Similarly, to compare enrichments 
between the set of genes with high promoter PDR and low promoter PDR (less than mean 
promoter PDR of 0.1 in >75% of 104 CLL samples), a Fisher’s exact test was used, followed by 
a Benjamini-Hochberg FDR procedure. This latter procedure was done to avoid potential biases 
related to the CpG content of different promoters as previously described . By comparing 
enrichments of two gene sets both covered by RRBS, these biases are likely to have minimal 
impact. A similar procedure was undertaken for gene set enrichment analysis of genes with 
significant change in methylation in the longitudinal samples (Q < 0.1). By comparing these 
gene-sets with genes that did not have a significant change in methylation (Q > 0.2), we were 
able to assess the gene set enrichment while limiting the impact of biases related to CpG 
content of different gene promoters.   
 
Statistical methods: Statistical analysis was performed with MATLAB (MathWorks, Natick, 
MA), R version 2.15.2 and SAS version 9.2 (SAS Institute, Cary, NC). Categorical variables 
were compared using the Fisher Exact test, and continuous variables were compared using the 
Student’s t-test, Wilcoxon rank sum test, or Kruskal-Wallis test as appropriate. Linear modeling 
for expression as a predicted variable, based on methylation and PDR was performed using 
built in R linear model function. FFS (failure-free survival from first treatment after sampling) was 
defined as the time to the 2nd treatment or death from the 1st treatment following sampling, was 
calculated only for those patients who had a 1st treatment after the sample and was censored at 
the date of last contact for those who had only one treatment after the sample, and estimated 
using the method of Kaplan and Meier. The difference between groups was assessed using the 
log-rank test. Unadjusted and adjusted Cox modeling was performed to assess the impact of 
established CLL high-risk predictors and the presence of a subclonal driver. Models were 
adjusted for known prognostic factors including the presence of a 17p deletion, the presence of 
a 11q deletion and IGHV mutational status. Cytogenetic abnormalities were primarily assessed 
by FISH; if FISH was unavailable, genomic data were used. For unknown IGHV mutational 
status an indicator was included in adjusted modeling and was not found to be significant. 
Similarly, unadjusted and adjusted Cox modeling was performed to assess the impact of 
mutational burden and average promoter methylation in addition to established CLL prognostic 
factors. Given the large number of potential variables, a stepwise selection procedure was used 
to determine a final multivariable model considering all factors listed above. All p-values are 
two-sided and considered significant at the 0.05 level unless otherwise noted.  
  

 
36	  
SUPPLEMENTAL REFERENCES 
 
 
Anders, S., Pyl, P.T., and Huber, W. (2014). HTSeq – A Python framework to work with 
high-throughput sequencing data.  bioRxiv. 
 
Berger, M.F., Lawrence, M.S., Demichelis, F., Drier, Y., Cibulskis, K., Sivachenko, A.Y., Sboner, 
A., Esgueva, R., Pflueger, D., Sougnez, C., et al. (2011). The genomic complexity of primary 
human prostate cancer.  Nature. 470, 214-220. 
 
Bock, C., Kiskinis, E., Verstappen, G., Gu, H., Boulting, G., Smith, Z.D., Ziller, M., Croft, G.F., 
Amoroso, M.W., Oakley, D.H., et al. (2011). Reference Maps of human ES and iPS cell 
variation enable high-throughput characterization of pluripotent cell lines.  Cell. 144, 439-
452. 
 
Bock, C., Reither, S., Mikeska, T., Paulsen, M., Walter, J., and Lengauer, T. (2005). BiQ 
Analyzer: visualization and quality control for DNA methylation data from bisulfite 
sequencing.  Bioinformatics. 21, 4067-4068. 
 
Carter, S.L., Cibulskis, K., Helman, E., McKenna, A., Shen, H., Zack, T., Laird, P.W., Onofrio, 
R.C., Winckler, W., Weir, B.A., et al. (2012). Absolute quantification of somatic DNA 
alterations in human cancer.  Nat Biotechnol. 30, 413-421. 
 
Chapman, M.A., Lawrence, M.S., Keats, J.J., Cibulskis, K., Sougnez, C., Schinzel, A.C., 
Harview, C.L., Brunet, J.P., Ahmann, G.J., Adli, M., et al. (2011). Initial genome sequencing 
and analysis of multiple myeloma.  Nature. 471, 467-472. 
 
Chen, C.L., Rappailles, A., Duquenne, L., Huvet, M., Guilbaud, G., Farinelli, L., Audit, B., 
d'Aubenton-Carafa, Y., Arneodo, A., Hyrien, O., et al. (2010). Impact of replication timing on 
non-CpG and CpG substitution rates in mammalian genomes.  Genome Res. 20, 447-457. 
 
Cibulskis, K., Lawrence, M.S., Carter, S.L., Sivachenko, A., Jaffe, D., Sougnez, C., Gabriel, S., 
Meyerson, M., Lander, E.S., and Getz, G. (2013). Sensitive detection of somatic point 
mutations in impure and heterogeneous cancer samples.  Nat Biotechnol. 31, 213-219. 
 
DePristo, M.A., Banks, E., Poplin, R., Garimella, K.V., Maguire, J.R., Hartl, C., Philippakis, A.A., 
del Angel, G., Rivas, M.A., Hanna, M., et al. (2011). A framework for variation discovery and 
genotyping using next-generation DNA sequencing data.  Nat Genet. 43, 491-498. 
 
Escobar, M., and West, M. (1995). Bayesian density estimation and inference using 
mixtures.  Journal of the American Statistical Association. 90, 577-588. 
 
Fisher, S., Barry, A., Abreu, J., Minie, B., Nolan, J., Delorey, T.M., Young, G., Fennell, T.J., 
Allen, A., Ambrogio, L., et al. (2011). A scalable, fully automated process for construction 
of sequence-ready human exome targeted capture libraries.  Genome Biol. 12, R1. 
 
Gibbs, J.R., van der Brug, M.P., Hernandez, D.G., Traynor, B.J., Nalls, M.A., Lai, S.L., Arepalli, 
S., Dillman, A., Rafferty, I.P., Troncoso, J., et al. (2010). Abundant quantitative trait loci exist 
for DNA methylation and gene expression in human brain.  PLoS genetics. 6, e1000952. 
 
 

 
37	  
Illingworth, R.S., Gruenewald-Schneider, U., Webb, S., Kerr, A.R., James, K.D., Turner, D.J., 
Smith, C., Harrison, D.J., Andrews, R., and Bird, A.P. (2010). Orphan CpG islands identify 
numerous conserved promoters in the mammalian genome.  PLoS Genet. 6, e1001134. 
 
Karnani, N., Taylor, C., Malhotra, A., and Dutta, A. (2007). Pan-S replication patterns and 
chromosomal domains defined by genome-tiling arrays of ENCODE genomic areas.  
Genome research. 17, 865-876. 
 
Kim, D., Pertea, G., Trapnell, C., Pimentel, H., Kelley, R., and Salzberg, S.L. (2013). TopHat2: 
accurate alignment of transcriptomes in the presence of insertions, deletions and gene 
fusions.  Genome biology. 14, R36. 
 
Li, H., Ruan, J., and Durbin, R. (2008). Mapping short DNA sequencing reads and calling 
variants using mapping quality scores.  Genome Res. 18, 1851-1858. 
 
McKenna, A., Hanna, M., Banks, E., Sivachenko, A., Cibulskis, K., Kernytsky, A., Garimella, K., 
Altshuler, D., Gabriel, S., Daly, M., et al. (2010). The Genome Analysis Toolkit: a MapReduce 
framework for analyzing next-generation DNA sequencing data.  Genome Res. 20, 1297-
1303. 
 
Quesada, V., Conde, L., Villamor, N., Ordonez, G.R., Jares, P., Bassaganyas, L., Ramsay, A.J., 
Bea, S., Pinyol, M., Martinez-Trillos, A., et al. (2012). Exome sequencing identifies recurrent 
mutations of the splicing factor SF3B1 gene in chronic lymphocytic leukemia.  Nat Genet. 
44, 47-52. 
 
Rassenti, L., Jain, S., Keating, M., Wierda, W., Grever, M., Byrd, J., Kay, N., Brown, J., Gribben, 
J., Neuberg, D., et al. (2008). Relative value of ZAP-70, CD38, and immunoglobulin 
mutation status in predicting aggressive disease in chronic lymphocytic leukemia.  
Blood. 112, 1923-1930. 
 
Robinson, M.D., McCarthy, D.J., and Smyth, G.K. (2010). edgeR: a Bioconductor package 
for differential expression analysis of digital gene expression data.  Bioinformatics. 26, 
139-140. 
 
Shannon, C.E. (1948). A Mathematical Theory of Communication.  Bell System Technical 
Journal. 27, 379–423. 
 
Smoley, S.A., Van Dyke, D.L., Kay, N.E., Heerema, N.A., Dell' Aquila, M.L., Dal Cin, P., Koduru, 
P., Aviram, A., Rassenti, L., Byrd, J.C., et al. (2010). Standardization of fluorescence in situ 
hybridization studies on chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) blood and marrow cells by 
the CLL Research Consortium.  Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 203, 141-148. 
 
Subramanian, A., Tamayo, P., Mootha, V., Mukherjee, S., Ebert, B., Gillette, M., Paulovich, A., 
Pomeroy, S., Golub, T., Lander, E., et al. (2005). Gene set enrichment analysis: a 
knowledge-based approach for interpreting genome-wide expression profiles.  Proc Natl 
Acad Sci U S A. 102, 15545-15550. 
 
Wang, H., Maurano, M.T., Qu, H., Varley, K.E., Gertz, J., Pauli, F., Lee, K., Canfield, T., 
Weaver, M., Sandstrom, R., et al. (2012). Widespread plasticity in CTCF occupancy linked 
to DNA methylation.  Genome Res. 22, 1680-1688. 
 

 
38	  
Wang, L., Lawrence, M.S., Wan, Y., Stojanov, P., Sougnez, C., Stevenson, K., Werner, L., 
Sivachenko, A., DeLuca, D.S., Zhang, L., et al. (2011). SF3B1 and other novel cancer genes 
in chronic lymphocytic leukemia.  N Engl J Med. 365, 2497-2506. 
 
Woodfine, K., Huddleston, J.E., and Murrell, A. (2011). Quantitative analysis of DNA 
methylation at all human imprinted regions reveals preservation of epigenetic stability in 
adult somatic tissue.  Epigenetics & chromatin. 4, 1. 
 
Xi, Y., and Li, W. (2009). BSMAP: whole genome bisulfite sequence MAPping program.  
BMC Bioinformatics. 10, 232. 
 
 
 
