Article
Passenger Hotspot Mutations in Cancer
Graphical Abstract
Highlights
d Many cancer hotspots are passengers, recurring at inherently
mutable genomic sites
d Known genomic covariates are insufﬁcient to fully predict
inherent mutability
d Our LNP model accurately infers latent variability beyond
what current covariates predict
d Our LNP model identiﬁes putative driver hotspots with far
fewer false-positives
Authors
Julian M. Hess, Andre Bernards,
Jaegil Kim, ..., Nicholas J. Haradhvala,
Michael S. Lawrence, Gad Getz
Correspondence
mslawrence@mgh.harvard.edu (M.S.L.),
gadgetz@broadinstitute.org (G.G.)
In Brief
Somatic hotspot mutations found in
tumors are generally considered
evidence for selection and are used to
nominate tumor drivers. Hess et al. show
that many hotspots occur at inherently
mutable sites without selection and
develop a model that accounts for these
passenger hotspots, which can more
accurately nominate true driver
mutations.
Hess et al., 2019, Cancer Cell 36, 288–301
September 16, 2019 ª 2019 Elsevier Inc.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccell.2019.08.002

Cancer Cell
Article
Passenger Hotspot Mutations in Cancer
Julian M. Hess,1 Andre Bernards,2,3 Jaegil Kim,1 Mendy Miller,1 Amaro Taylor-Weiner,1 Nicholas J. Haradhvala,1,2
Michael S. Lawrence,1,2,3,4,* and Gad Getz1,2,3,4,5,*
1The Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA
2Center for Cancer Research, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 02114, USA
3Harvard Medical School, 250 Longwood Avenue, Boston, MA 02115, USA
4Department of Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 02114, USA
5Lead Contact
*Correspondence: mslawrence@mgh.harvard.edu (M.S.L.), gadgetz@broadinstitute.org (G.G.)
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccell.2019.08.002
SUMMARY
Current statistical models for assessing hotspot signiﬁcance do not properly account for variation in site-
speciﬁc mutability, thereby yielding many false-positives. We thus (i) detail a Log-normal-Poisson (LNP)
background model that accounts for this variability in a manner consistent with models of mutagenesis; (ii)
use it to show that passenger hotspots arise from all common mutational processes; and (iii) apply it to a
10,000-patient cohort to nominate driver hotspots with far fewer false-positives compared with conven-
tional methods. Overall, we show that many cancer hotspot mutations recurring at the same genomic site
across multiple tumors are actually passenger events, recurring at inherently mutable genomic sites under
no positive selection.
INTRODUCTION
The genome of a cell lineage continually accrues mutations over
time. The vast majority of mutations are either selectively neutral
‘‘passengers’’ that leave the lineage phenotypically unaltered, or
selectively negative mutations that result in slower growth or cell
death. However, occasionally, rare selectively positive mutations
(‘‘drivers’’) that increase a cell’s proliferative ﬁtness can occur.
Such a cell may acquire additional driver events that enable it
to outcompete its neighbors, eventually transforming into cancer
(Cairns, 1975; Stratton et al., 2009).
Selectively positive mutations accumulate in tumor suppres-
sors and oncogenes. These cancer driver genes are recurrently
mutated across tumors, and can be identiﬁed based on having
mutational densities signiﬁcantly above the background passen-
ger density. This requires accurate estimation of the mutational
background, a task complicated by its considerable heterogene-
ity (Hodgkinson and Eyre-Walker, 2011). Some genomic ele-
ments are recurrently mutated not due to positive selection but
rather simply due to their higher mutability (Hodgkinson and
Eyre-Walker, 2011; Stamatoyannopoulos et al., 2009; Pleasance
et al., 2010). Over the past decade, the ﬁeld has developed
increasingly sophisticated statistical models (Lawrence et al.,
2013, 2014; Weghorn and Sunyaev, 2017; Martincorena et al.,
2017; Dees et al., 2012; Getz et al., 2007) to infer and account
for
the
heterogeneous
mutational
background.
This
has
increased power and speciﬁcity to distinguish true drivers (with
an excess of positively selected mutations) from false-positives
(with increased mutation density due to high background muta-
bility alone).
Some of the best-known oncogenes are recurrently mutated
at the same codon in many tumors, e.g., the V600E mutation in
BRAF. Inspired by these examples, many methods for detecting
driver events use exact positional recurrence as a signal of
positive selection. This requires a model of background muta-
bility at the site-speciﬁc level. The prevailing assumption has
been that all equivalent base pairs within a particular gene
(e.g., all sites with the same k-mer sequence context) have the
Signiﬁcance
Hotspot mutations have conventionally been taken as universal evidence of somatic positive selection, unequivocally pin-
pointing genes driving tumorigenesis. We show here that this convention is falsely premised on an inaccurate statistical
model of background mutagenesis. Many hotspots are actually passengers, recurring at inherently mutable sites under
no positive selection, which current background models do not account for. We develop a model that accounts for variation
in site-speciﬁc mutability and use it to nominate driver hotspots with far fewer false-positives compared with conventional
methods. As the research community faces critical decisions in prioritizing putative driver mutations for deep experimental
characterization to assess therapeutic potential, we offer our ﬁndings as a guide to avoid wasting valuable resources on
passenger hotspots.
288
Cancer Cell 36, 288–301, September 16, 2019 ª 2019 Elsevier Inc.

same background probability of being mutated. Thus, it is un-
likely to observe by chance many tumors sharing mutations at
a particular base pair in a gene, while the other equivalent
base pairs of the gene remain unmutated. This leads to the con-
ventional assumption that mutational hotspots must reﬂect true
driver events and that no ‘‘passenger hotspots’’ occur. Here,
we present evidence to the contrary.
RESULTS
In the same way that certain regions of the genome are more
highly mutated than others, and certain fragile sites of the
genome are more prone to breakage (Schrock and Huebner,
2015; Mitsui and Tsuji, 2012), certain individual base pairs
in the genome appear to be more mutable, simply because
they are more vulnerable to damage and/or more refractory
to repair. Thus, to identify signiﬁcantly mutated hotspots, we
must ﬁrst be able to statistically estimate position-speciﬁc muta-
tion frequencies. This requires a large cohort of very high-quality
somatic mutation calls to have sufﬁcient power to accurately
estimate base-level mutation frequencies and to avoid recur-
rent sequencing artifacts or germline polymorphisms that
can severely distort base-level analyses. Here, we examined a
cohort of 9,023 quality-controlled whole-exome-sequenced
tumor/normal pairs spanning 32 tumor types, generated by the
The Cancer Genome Atlas MC3 mutation-calling initiative (Ellrott
et al., 2018), a dataset containing 2,288,080 somatic single-
nucleotide variations.
Discovering Signiﬁcant Hotspots Based on a Statistical
Model of the Site-Speciﬁc Background Mutational
Frequency
A common approach to ﬁnd signiﬁcantly mutated bases (i.e.,
‘‘hotspots’’) is to compare the observed number of mutations
across a cohort at a given site with the distribution of the ex-
pected number of mutations predicted by a given background
model, generating a p value for that site. Sites passing multi-
ple-hypothesis correction (e.g., false discovery rate [FDR]
q value % 0.1) are then considered signiﬁcant hotspots. Obvi-
ously, what gets called statistically signiﬁcant is only biologically
meaningful if the underlying statistical approximation of the true
background mutation frequency is accurate. Although we
cannot directly evaluate the underlying model’s overall accuracy
since we lack ground truth background mutation frequencies for
every genomic position, we can assess a given model’s speci-
ﬁcity via orthogonal criteria for whether mutations deemed sig-
niﬁcant are indeed under positive selection.
One orthogonal criterion we can use to assess whether a mu-
tation is under positive selection is the distribution of variant pro-
tein-coding effects compared with expectation. Variant effects
of mutations under no selective pressure will be randomly
distributed according to the codon structure and signatures
of mutational processes operating throughout the exome. In
contrast, positively selected mutations are mostly nonsynony-
mous or splice altering, because essentially all coding driver
mutations alter their corresponding protein. A recent study (Mar-
tincorena et al., 2017) estimated the fraction of synonymous
driver mutations at approximately 5%, most of which are splice
altering. Therefore, an effective proxy for the speciﬁcity of a given
algorithm is the degree to which the candidate driver hotspots it
ﬁnds are enriched for nonsynonymous mutations beyond the
expected baseline.
We calculate this baseline by using the overall exonic substitu-
tion frequencies for each trinucleotide context to generate the ex-
pected background frequencies of each coding effect––synony-
mous, missense, nonsense––in that context. By adding the
contributions from all 96 trinucleotide substitutions, weighted by
their relative frequencies,we ﬁnd anoverall expected baseline dis-
tribution of 28% synonymous, 67% missense, and 5% nonsense
mutations (Figure S1). Note that throughout our entire analysis, we
avoid splice-altering mutations by excluding genomic positions
and mutations within 5 base pairs of a splice site, since synony-
mous events at those positions frequently disrupt splicing (Supek
et al., 2014). We also avoid mutations overlapping transcription
factor binding sites by excluding positions overlapping regions
harboring strongevidenceoftranscription factorbinding (i.e., sites
assayed in more than 90 cell lines with >70% of scores >800), as
inferred by ENCODE chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing
experiments (Gerstein et al., 2012).
Hotspots in Non-KCGs Found Signiﬁcant by
Conventional Algorithms Are Mostly Neutral
A simple and still common background model employs the con-
ventional assumption used in many studies up until recently (Van
den Eynden et al., 2015; Lohr et al., 2012; Lawrence et al., 2014;
Chang et al., 2016; Baeissa et al., 2017; Araya et al., 2016; Miller
et al., 2015) that all sites within the same k-mer context in a given
gene are equally mutable. Our version of this model, which we
will refer to as ‘‘Uniform-within-gene,’’ assumes that the back-
ground mutation frequency at a given position is proportional
to the average exome-wide mutation frequency for the base sub-
stitution/trinucleotide combination at that position, weighted by
a gene-speciﬁc mutability factor that captures the overall num-
ber of mutations in the gene. Expected counts are Poisson
distributed around this background frequency. This null distribu-
tion can also be generated by permuting mutations while main-
taining their sequence context within each gene (e.g., Lawrence
et al., 2014). Applying these assumptions yields a long list of
1,677 signiﬁcant hotspots within 1,218 genes across our pan-
cancer cohort. Although many of these signiﬁcant hotspots
occur in known cancer genes (KCGs), as deﬁned by the Cancer
Gene Census (CGC) (v.85) (Futreal et al., 2004)––77/133 KCGs
contain signiﬁcant hotspots (Figure 1A) and recapitulate known
driver events (e.g., BRAF V600E)––1,264 signiﬁcant hotspots
occur in 1,131 genes with uncertain oncogenic roles (non-
KCGs) (Figure 1A).
Signiﬁcant hotspots in KCGs are nearly devoid of synonymous
mutations (0.4% of mutations at hotspots versus the expected
27.9%), providing strong orthogonal evidence that these muta-
tions are indeed under positive selection. If the 1,264 putative
driver hotspots in non-KCGs were also drivers, one would
expect that they too would be highly depleted of synonymous
mutations. Instead, however, we ﬁnd that the distribution of their
coding effects is very close to what we expect by chance
(observed silent 19.1% versus expected 24.3%, Figure 1B), indi-
cating that most of these hotspots are equivalent to randomly
chosen mutations, and are thus neutral passengers under little-
to-no selective pressure.
Cancer Cell 36, 288–301, September 16, 2019
289

Assuming that mutational patterns in KCGs reﬂect mutational
patterns of driver genes in general, then the overwhelming ma-
jority of all silent hotspots are likely to be passenger events, given
their extreme paucity in KCGs. However, this is a conservative
assumption––although the fraction of synonymous drivers was
estimated at 5% (Martincorena et al., 2017) (of which most are
splice altering), it is possible that non-splice-altering synony-
mous mutations can have a functional effect, e.g., by affecting
mRNA folding stability (Katz and Burge, 2003), binding of regula-
tory factors, or translational efﬁciency (Quax et al., 2015). Such
driver mutations are likely rare, owing to their absence in
KCGs, but their exact prevalence is difﬁcult to quantify. There-
fore, we liberally assume that 10% of non-splice-altering synon-
ymous variants are in fact functional.
We would expect a proportion of observed nonsynonymous
mutations concordant with the expected ratio between (the
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
Figure 1. Comparison of Number of Genes Containing Hotspots and Protein-Coding Effects of Hotspots Found Signiﬁcant by the Four Sta-
tistical Models
(A) Number of genes containing signiﬁcant hotspots (q % 0.1) according to the Uniform-within-gene statistical model, segregated by whether the gene is a known
cancer gene (KCG) (i.e., in the Cancer Gene Census). Genes under neutral selection are conservatively deﬁned to have R95% probability of their dN/dS falling
between 0.8 and 1.2; orange scale fades to white when this probability falls below 0.5. Genes under positive selection are deﬁned to have R97.5% probability
dN / dS > 1.2; blue scale fades to white when probability falls below 0.7. Genes are denoted as lost from signiﬁcance relative to the Uniform-within-gene method.
(B) Expected and observed distributions of protein-coding effects of hotspot mutations signiﬁcant (q % 0.1) by the Uniform-within-gene model, segregated by
known cancer gene status. We estimate the overall fraction of false-positive passenger mutations (hatched bars) by assuming 90% of signiﬁcant synonymous
hotspots are false-positives. Thus, the proportion of observed nonsynonymous mutations concordant with the expected ratio between synonymous and
nonsynonymous mutations will also be passengers.
(C) Same as (A) but according to the Uniform Poisson model.
(D) Same as (B) but by the Uniform Poisson model.
(E) Same as (A) but by the Gamma-Poisson model.
(F) Same as (B) but by the Gamma-Poisson model.
(G) Same as (A) but by the Log-normal-Poisson model.
(H) Same as (B) but by the Log-normal-Poisson model. Lines between stacked bars denote 95% conﬁdence intervals.
See also Figure S1, Tables S1, S2, and S3.
290
Cancer Cell 36, 288–301, September 16, 2019

90% presumed nonfunctional) synonymous and nonsynony-
mous mutations to also be passenger events. For example, if
the expected ratio of synonymous to nonsynonymous mutations
was 1:3, and 10% of putative signiﬁcant hotspots were synony-
mous (of which 90% are presumed nonfunctional), then we
would expect an additional 3 3 0.1 3 0.9 = 27% of the putative
nonsynonymous hotspots to also be passengers. By this
reasoning, at least 66.4% of putative nonsilent driver hotspots
in non-KCGs according to the conventional Uniform-within-
gene model are also false-positives, illustrated by the hatched
bars in Figure 1A.
In addition to ﬁnding that these hotspot mutations at the base
pair level are neutral, we also noted that a large fraction of the
genes containing these hotspots are themselves neutral. To
determine this, we assessed whether a gene was under neutral
selection (i.e., not under positive or negative selection) using
the molecular evolution criterion of the ratio of a gene’s nonsyno-
nymous:synonymous somatic mutation densities (dN/dS) (Ki-
mura, 1977; Martincorena et al., 2017; Nei and Gojobori, 1986).
After normalizing for signature heterogeneity and genes’ codon
structures (Greenman et al., 2006), we expect parity between
these densities (i.e., dN/dS z1) in genes under neutral selection.
Computing dN/dS for each gene can only yield a conﬁdent esti-
mate in genes with sufﬁcient numbers of mutations, allowing us
to conservatively assess whether they were under neutral selec-
tion. We identiﬁed 194 (of the 20,000) genes conﬁdently under
neutral selection (R95% probability that the gene’s dN/dS is be-
tween 0.8 and 1.2). A total of 22.8% of non-KCGs that contained
signiﬁcant hotspots was either within these 194 genes (n = 70) or
only contained silent hotspots (n = 200) (Figure 1A; Table S1),
further conﬁrming the poor speciﬁcity of the conventional
Uniform-within-gene model. Overall, we conclude that analysis
methods based on the conventional assumption that equivalent
base pairs have the same background mutability produce lists of
candidate hotspots with many false-positives.
Thus, the apparent signiﬁcant recurrence of mutations even
at sites/genes under neutral selection is due to a naive back-
ground model that fails to account for the underlying variability
in the background base-wise mutability. We therefore need
to model mutational recurrences with a site-speciﬁc background
model.
Currently Known Covariates Cannot Account for all
Base-Wise Mutational Heterogeneity
It is
possible that
the unaccounted
variability
might be
completely explained by previously reported covariates that
affect mutation frequencies on both coarse and ﬁne scales. Co-
variates such as replication timing (Stamatoyannopoulos et al.,
2009), chromatin state (Polak et al., 2015), and gene expression
levels (Pleasance et al., 2010) have been reported to inﬂuence
background mutability on a broad scale (100 kbp–1 Mbp).
More recent studies have discovered that other covariates like
nucleosome positions or transcription factor binding activity in-
ﬂuence mutability on a much smaller scale (10s of base pairs)
(Poulos et al., 2016; Sabarinathan et al., 2016; Mao et al.,
2018). We tested a ﬁxed regression model in which the base-
wise mutation frequency is entirely determined by these
covariates, which we refer to as the ‘‘Uniform Poisson’’ model.
However, we ﬁnd that the covariates alone are incapable of ex-
plaining all of the variability, because 25.6% (n(dN/dS z 1) = 50,
n(only silent hotspots) = 149) of the 737 non-KCGs containing
signiﬁcant hotspots are conﬁdently under neutral selection (Fig-
ure 1C). Moreover, the distribution of protein-coding effects of
hotspots in non-KCGs found to be signiﬁcant by this method is
essentially identical to that of the Uniform-within-gene model
(observed silent fraction of 19.8% versus expected 24.8%; Fig-
ure 1D). Although additional yet-undiscovered covariates may
be able to better explain this variability in the future, we currently
are forced to update the model to explicitly allow for variability
in base-wise mutation frequencies beyond what can be fully
modeled with currently known covariates.
Introducing Uncertainty in Site-Speciﬁc Mutability
Improves Speciﬁcity of Finding Driver Hotspots with
Minimal Loss of Sensitivity
In contrast to the Uniform Poisson model, another way to ac-
count for the base-wise variability is by allowing the mutation
frequency at each site to be drawn from a probability distribution
reﬂecting additional variability in the background mutability. The
choice and parameterization of the underlying distribution can
make a large difference in model performance. Recent methods
have employed a Gamma-Poisson model, both at the gene
level (Weghorn and Sunyaev, 2017; Martincorena et al., 2017;
Imielinski et al., 2017) and on the base level (Smith et al.,
2016), in which mutation counts are still Poisson distributed,
but the Poisson rates vary according to a ﬁtted gamma distribu-
tion, adding an additional parameter to represent the overdisper-
sion. There is no inherent biological rationale for using the
gamma distribution to represent the uncertainty of the Poisson
rates––it is merely mathematically convenient, because there is
an easy closed-form expression for a Poisson distribution whose
rate is gamma-distributed: the negative binomial/Gamma-Pois-
son distribution. We found that by applying the Gamma-Poisson
regression model indeed explained a large amount of the addi-
tional variability, but it still did not capture all of it; while the set
of signiﬁcant hotspots in non-KCGs is depleted of synonymous
events (observed 12.3% versus expected 25.1%), we still see
that 15.7% (31/197) of non-KCGs containing signiﬁcant hotspots
are neutral (Figures 1E and 1F), suggesting that all the variability
is not yet accounted for in this model and there is additional
speciﬁcity to be gained.
Next, we tried to improve on the Gamma-Poisson model by re-
placing the gamma distribution with a log-normal distribution.
Unlike the gamma distribution, arbitrarily chosen for its mathe-
matical convenience, the log-normal distribution is based on
the idea that mutant base pairs do not instantaneously arise
but are the net result of many independent consecutive events
(e.g., damage and repair processes), each with an independent
probability of occurring. For instance, a mutagen has a certain
probability of initially damaging a nucleotide, which in turn has
a certain probability of being missed by all repair mechanisms
before S phase. Should all of these events occur, the DNA poly-
merase must also fail to recognize the lesion and incorporate the
wrong complementary base, which must survive another cell cy-
cle without being recognized to become a mutated base pair in
the genome. By the geometric central limit theorem, this product
of probabilities approaches a log-normal distribution (Sut-
ton, 1997).
Cancer Cell 36, 288–301, September 16, 2019
291

Applying this Log-normal-Poisson (LNP) model to our cohort
identiﬁed a list of candidate driver hotspots in non-KCGs with
the lowest fraction of non-KCGs under neutral selection with sig-
niﬁcant hotspots (7% [6/86] of genes; Figure 1G) and was most
depleted
of
synonymous
events
relative
to
expectation
(observed 6.6% versus expected 26.5%; Figure 1H). These re-
sults suggest that the LNP model has the highest speciﬁcity
among the four tested models.
Although the LNP model increases speciﬁcity of ﬁnding true
oncogenic hotspots, this potential advantage may come at the
expense of decreased sensitivity. Indeed, 31 KCGs containing
signiﬁcant hotspots according to the Uniform-within-gene model
are lost from signiﬁcance by the LNP model; 18 KCGs are lost
from signiﬁcance by the Gamma-Poisson model (Figures 1E
and 1G); and 28/15 genes are lost from signiﬁcance relative to
the Uniform Poisson model by the LNP/Gamma-Poisson
models, respectively. Although both the Gamma-Poisson and
LNP models ﬁnd fewer KCGs containing hotspots than both con-
ventional models, not all cancer genes driven by point mutations
must have strong mutational hotspots. For example, many tumor
suppressors can be inactivated via truncating mutations any-
where in their open reading frame; thus, while the gene as a
whole is recurrently mutated, its mutations do not need to recur
at the same speciﬁc genomic position to incur the same func-
tional effect. A position with many truncating mutations would
not have any additional ﬁtness advantage over any other position
with fewer truncating mutations, since any truncating muta-
tions far enough upstream of the C terminus will either induce
nonsense-mediated degradation of the mRNA or produce a
nonfunctional partial protein product. Thus, recurrent mutations
in cancer genes not driven by hotspots should not be considered
false-negatives for an algorithm that solely evaluates mutations
at the single-site level.
Although such genes may not be driven by hotspots, they
will still display an overall excess of nonsilent mutations and
should therefore be signiﬁcant by a gene-level burden test.
Of the 31 genes lost from signiﬁcance under the LNP model,
23 are still signiﬁcant by a conservative burden test (Prob[dN/
dS R 1.2] R0.975). The additional eight genes have too few mu-
tations to conﬁdently establish an excess of nonsilent events by
our conservative criterion but are all deemed signiﬁcant by more
sophisticated methods (e.g., MutSigCV [Lawrence et al., 2013],
which incorporates genomic covariates to estimate gene-level
background mutation frequencies).
Finally, we assess sensitivity on the individual allele level.
When searching for totally uncharacterized driver events (i.e.,
in non-KCGs), the goal is to identify both hotspots and the genes
that harbor them. However, many researchers are looking to
prioritize yet-uncharacterized potentially actionable mutations
in already characterized genes. To this end, to increase our sta-
tistical power, we restricted our hypothesis testing to only sites in
KCGs. This yielded 775 hotspots (at the codon substitution level;
Table S2) signiﬁcant by any of the four methods (qRHT < 0.1), 201
of which are not signiﬁcant by the LNP model. However, most of
these are loss-of-function events in tumor suppressors (deter-
mined analytically by enrichment in truncating mutations, Prob
[dT/dS R 1.2] R 0.975, Table S3); by the above reasoning, these
should not be considered false-negatives in a site-speciﬁc signif-
icance analysis. Excluding nonsense mutations and tumor sup-
pressors, the LNP model misses 70 hotspots, corresponding
to a 9% loss in sensitivity under the very liberal assumption
that all 775 hotspots identiﬁed by any method are indeed true
driver hotspots. The Gamma-Poisson, Uniform-within-gene,
and Uniform Poisson methods miss 8.9%, 7.5%, and 1% of
the 775, respectively.
Thus, both the LNP and Gamma-Poisson models retain sensi-
tivity on both the gene and allele levels if we speciﬁcally differen-
tiate cancer genes driven by hotspots from genes driven by an
overall excess of mutations.
Comparative Analyses Conﬁrm Improved Performance
of the LNP Model
To more rigorously assess the sensitivity and speciﬁcity trade-
offs of the different methods, we used receiver operating charac-
teristic (ROC) curve analysis employing as ground truth sets: (i) a
false-positive set of 194 genes conﬁdently under neutral selec-
tion, as deﬁned before (Prob[0.8 % dN/dS % 1.2] R95%); and
(ii) a true-positive set of 42 genes, deﬁned as KCGs with a high
concentration of nonsilent mutations at recurrently mutated po-
sitions. We identiﬁed these 42 true-positive genes by requiring
that the dN/dS of each gene dropped by more than 5% when
we removed all sites that were near signiﬁcance (q % 0.25) by
the least conservative Uniform-within-gene model (Table S1).
This ensures that it will attain 100% sensitivity by deﬁnition,
setting a relevant point of comparison for the other models,
because the Uniform-within-gene model has been widely em-
ployed (Van den Eynden et al., 2015; Lohr et al., 2012; Lawrence
et al., 2014; Chang et al., 2016; Baeissa et al., 2017; Araya et al.,
2016; Miller et al., 2015). However, we were aware that this true-
positive set depends on a speciﬁc method, and thus assembled
an alternate one comprising all KCGs with ﬁve or more recurrent
mutations in our cohort, with evidence in the literature supporting
an oncogenic role for the recurrent event. We only included
genes whose hotspots’ phenotypic effect was deemed consis-
tent with primary tumor development, thus excluding mutations
found only to confer resistance to treatment, or mutations found
only to promote metastasis. We also only included genes tested
in cell lines corresponding to the tissues in which the hotspot is
observed in vivo. This alternate true-positive set comprised 53
KCGs (Table S1).
We then plotted ROC curves based on these ground truth sets
for the four methods, using each method’s minimum q value
across all sites in the gene as the discrimination threshold (Fig-
ures 2A and S2A). We observed that the LNP model had the
highest area under the curve (AUC), followed by the Gamma-
Poisson, Uniform Poisson, and Uniform-within-gene methods.
The differences in AUC were almost entirely due to differences
in speciﬁcity, since all methods had comparable sensitivities.
On each curve, we denote the positions on the ROC curves
corresponding
to
the
standard
signiﬁcance
threshold
of
q % 0.1, at which the LNP model identiﬁed 494 signiﬁcant hot-
spots in 134 genes. Of these 134 genes, none of the genes
belong to the negative truth set; 39 genes, containing 169
hotspots, belong to the positive truth set, corresponding to a
sensitivity of 89% (CI95%[75%, 95%]). At the same threshold,
the Gamma-Poisson model achieved an insigniﬁcantly higher
sensitivity of 95% (CI95%[85%, 99%]) but a false-positive rate
of 4.1% (CI95%[1.8%, 7.29%]), corresponding to an FDR of
292
Cancer Cell 36, 288–301, September 16, 2019

16% (8 false-positive genes out of 50). The speciﬁcity losses
for the conventional models are even higher, with false-positive
rates of 25%/38% and FDRs of 56%/62% for the Uniform Pois-
son/Uniform-within-gene models, respectively. Re-running the
benchmarks using the alternate true-positive set did not signiﬁ-
cantly affect the results (Figure S2B). This ROC analysis sug-
gests that the LNP model performs the best among the four
models, having the highest speciﬁcity without a signiﬁcant loss
in sensitivity for cancer genes driven by hotspots.
Another way to quantify the inﬂation of signiﬁcant results of
different methods is to examine their quantile-quantile (QQ)
plots. Since we expect that most sites in the genome do not har-
bor driver events, we expect their p values to be uniformly
distributed. Indeed, when comparing the four different methods,
we observe that the QQ plots of the conventional methods are
inﬂated, demonstrating deviation from the uniform distribution
toward more signiﬁcant p values in a large fraction of genomic
loci (Figure S2C). The inﬂation of the models also affects the re-
sulting q values and produces lists of signiﬁcant hotspots (and
genes) that may contain more false-positives than expected by
the q value cutoff. In the case of a well-calibrated model (and
hence a well-behaved QQ plot), setting a speciﬁc q value
threshold (e.g., q % 0.1) would result in a list of signiﬁcant hits
that contain (on average) at most the desired fraction (10%) of
false-positives. It is therefore important to test whether this is
indeed the case.
We used our set of false-positives to measure the empirical
FDR. Since this is a conservative list, we expect to have an
even lower FDR than the chosen q value cutoff. We compare
the empirical FDR as a function of q value among the four models
(Figure 2B). The LNP model is the only model for which the
empirical FDR did not exceed the desired FDR (Table 1). By
contrast, even at the extreme q value threshold of 108, approx-
imately 3% of hotspots signiﬁcant by the Uniform-within-gene or
Uniform Poisson models are in false-positive genes. Thus, these
data conﬁrm that only the LNP model’s q value cutoff properly
bounds the FDR.
Finally, in addition to the ROC/QQ analyses, we present a
nonparametric benchmark: the fraction of false-positives nomi-
nated by each method in the top N signiﬁcant hotspots in non-
KCGs. This reﬂects the approach of a researcher looking to
prioritize putative drivers for experimental characterization,
whose ﬁnite resources only allow for investigation of a ﬁxed num-
ber of hotspots (e.g., 100). The method returning the fewest hot-
spots in the false-positive truth set would likely contain the most
true-positives, since a set of hotspots containing fewer conﬁdent
false-positives will contain more potential drivers.
Out of its top 100 hotspots in non-KCGs, the LNP model nom-
inates zero occurring in a false-positive gene. The other three
methods nominate between 5 and 9 false-positive hotspots. If
we picked a gene at random out of the 19,315 genes we
analyzed, there is a 1% chance of it being in the false-positive
truth set (194 genes). Thus, we see that the other methods’ top
100 hotspots are signiﬁcantly enriched for false-positives, and
thus further depleted of potential true-positives.
The LNP Model Produced the Most Accurate Estimates
of Neutral Mutation Frequency
In addition to evaluating model performance by examining the
protein-coding effects of hotspots found signiﬁcant by each
model, we can also assess how well each model predicts the
expected number of mutated patients at each genomic position.
A
B
Figure 2. Performance of the Four Methods Quantiﬁed by ROC and FDR Analysis
(A) ROC curves for each method evaluated at the gene level. Truth set used for estimating false-positive rate comprises genes conﬁdently under neutral selection;
truth set used for estimating true-positive rate comprises KCGs with a high proportion of mutations at recurrently mutated positions. A gene is considered a hit for
the ROC analysis if it has at least one hotspot more signiﬁcant than a speciﬁc q value cutoff. q value cutoffs of 0.1 and 0.01 are marked on each curve. Because the
Log-normal-Poisson model has a false-positive rate of 0 even at q < 0.1, we indicate this position in ROC space with an ‘‘*’’ marker at the lowest possible non-zero
false-positive rate.
(B) Fraction of loci falling in false-positive truth set genes (empirical FDR) as a function of q value. The gray area indicates the region for which the empirical FDR
exceeds the q value; methods whose curves lie in this region yield more false-positives than expected by the q value cutoff. Colored regions indicate 95% beta
distribution conﬁdence intervals on the fractions. q value thresholds of 0.1, 0.01, and 0.001 are shown as vertical dotted lines, with circles denoting where they
intersect the curves.
See also Figure S2 and Table S1.
Cancer Cell 36, 288–301, September 16, 2019
293

A well-calibrated model accurately infers the background muta-
tion frequency at each position, so the expected mutation fre-
quencies at positions under neutral selection will be concordant
with the observed frequencies. On the other hand, a poorly
calibrated model that inaccurately models the background fre-
quency will predict mutational frequencies that signiﬁcantly
deviate from the observed frequencies.
To compare the accuracy of the different background models,
we calculated the observed distribution of recurrent synony-
mously mutated sites (i.e., the fraction of sites with a speciﬁc
number of mutations out of all sites that can harbor synonymous
mutations) (Figure 3A). We then compared with the expected
distributions predicted by each of the four models. While the
conventional models underestimate the fraction of sites mutated
in three or more patients––synonymous sites mutated in exactly
three patients are 3.53 more likely than expected by the Uni-
form-within-gene model; overall, synonymous mutations recur-
ring in R3 patients are 123 more likely than expected by the
model––both
overdispersed
models
(Gamma-Poisson
and
LNP) are more accurate, with the LNP model most correctly
recapitulating the observed distribution even for highly recurrent
events, with synonymous mutations recurring in R3 patients
1.843 more likely than expected by the Gamma-Poisson model,
but only 1.053 more likely by the LNP model.
Although the two overdispersed models performed much bet-
ter in predicting mutation frequencies than the non-overdis-
persed models, they are not identical. We illustrate a speciﬁc
instance of this by looking at a sequence context containing
recurrent mutations in likely passenger genes that only the
LNP model avoids calling signiﬁcant (Figure 3B). Three of the
most recurrently mutated positions in the sequence context
A(A/C)G occur in Spectrin alpha (SPTA1; ten missense muta-
tions: six in stomach adenocarcinoma and one each in bladder,
cervical, colon, and lung squamous tumors), Titin (TTN; seven
missense mutations: three stomach, two colorectal, one each
in lung squamous and esophageal tumors), and regulating syn-
aptic exocytosis protein 2 (RIMS2; ten synonymous mutations:
ﬁve stomach, three colon, one each in esophageal and liver tu-
mors). All three of these mutations were found to be signiﬁcant
by the Gamma-Poisson model (q = 53104, q = 0.002, and
q = 0.002, respectively) and by both conventional models
(q values < 1013 for all genes and models) but not by the LNP
model (q = 0.97, q = 0.72, and q = 1.0, respectively). Because
all of these genes are only expressed in speciﬁc tissue types
(SPTA1 in red blood cell progenitors, TTN in muscle cells, and
RIMS2 in neurons), it is highly likely that these represent passen-
ger hotspots. Additional evidence that these genes are passen-
gers is provided by the dN/dS analysis, which assigns the genes
tight conﬁdence intervals around 1 (SPTA1: mean dN/dS 1.05,
CI95% [0.92,1.19]; TTN: mean 0.98, CI95% [0.94,1.02]; RIMS2
mean 1.02, CI95% [0.86,1.22]), and by the fact that the hotspot
in RIMS2 is synonymous. By contrast, three of the other most
recurrently mutated positions in the context fall in known drivers
(EGFR, TP53, and KRAS, mutated in 8, 13, and 14 patients,
respectively), and are signiﬁcant by all four methods. Thus, taken
together, these data suggest that the overdispersed LNP model
most accurately predicts actual mutation frequencies and
makes the fewest false-positive calls.
Signiﬁcant Hotspots Identiﬁed by the LNP Model
The main scientiﬁc interest of any signiﬁcance analysis method is
to discover promising but not yet experimentally validated driver
candidates for subsequent experimental follow-up. Since the
LNP model performed well in excluding many more false-posi-
tive passenger mutations than the other three tested models,
we can have more conﬁdence that the genes in the resulting
list of still-signiﬁcant hotspots are enriched for true drivers. The
LNP model yielded 494 signiﬁcant hotspots (q % 0.1) in 134
genes (49 KCGs, containing 405 hotspots, and 85 non-KCGs,
containing 89 hotspots) (Table S2). The KCGs contain 29 of
the conservative true-positive genes (including KRAS, BRAF,
and PIK3CA) and also 20 other genes not in the truth set but
still with signiﬁcant hotspots, including PTEN, SMAD4, and
CDKN2A.
Since we use an FDR threshold of q % 0.1, approximately 49
out of the 494 signiﬁcant hotspots should be false-positives. If
we assume that none of the 405 hotspots in KCGs are false-pos-
itives, then we expect that 40 (= 89  49) out of the 89 hotspots in
85 non-KCGs are true-positives.
Within the 85 non-KCGs (Figure 4), 26 have been previously
experimentally implicated in cancer but are not yet well-known
enough to be included in the CGC, or are in the CGC but not
due to somatic point mutations (e.g., implicated by germline
risk alleles or copy-number/structural alterations). We discuss
these genes in depth in Table S4 and Figure S3.
We note that the three other models (and other conventional
methods) also ﬁnd all of our signiﬁcant hotspots, but are diluted
by many other false-positives. Overall, we demonstrate that the
LNP model produces a highly accurate list of driver hotspots that
provide clear biological hypotheses, some of which have already
been supported by experimental data. Future experiments will
be needed to validate the functional role of the other hotspots.
Hotspot-Generating Mutational Processes Have Similar
Base-Wise Heterogeneity Despite Having Vastly
Different Mutation Frequencies
Our results provide evidence of pervasive variability in base-
wise
mutation
frequency
across
cancer,
irrespective
of
mutagen or underlying mutational process. Next, we tested
whether different mutational processes have different levels
of variability. Each mutational process has speciﬁcity for partic-
ular genomic contexts and features, deﬁning a set of ‘‘bases-
at-risk’’ for that process. We might expect differences in the
degree to which different mutational processes diverge from
uniformly targeting their bases-at-risk and thus different levels
of variability. Because there is considerable heterogeneity in
Table 1. Fraction of Hotspots in Conﬁdent False-Positive Genes
(Empirical FDR) at the Indicated q Value Cutoff
Method
q % 0.1
q % 0.01
q % 0.001
Uniform-within-
gene
0.06 (102/1,678)
0.05 (45/920)
0.03 (19/590)
Uniform Poisson
0.05 (82/1,547)
0.03 (29/1,006)
0.02 (14/713)
Gamma-Poisson
0.01 (8/710)
0.01 (5/504)
0.01 (3/387)
Log-normal-
Poisson
0.0 (0/511)
0.0 (0/290)
0.0 (0/191)
294
Cancer Cell 36, 288–301, September 16, 2019

the overall mutation frequencies of different processes (ranging
from  10 muts=million bases  at  risk for methylated-CpG
deamination
to
>5; 000 muts=million bases  at  risk
for
POLE hypermutation), we might predict a correspondingly
wide range in the variability across bases-at-risk of different
processes. Tellingly, many published analyses have been
forced to exclude hypermutated tumors from signiﬁcance ana-
lyses because they yield too many signiﬁcantly mutated genes/
hotspots, largely due to the inaccurate background models in
wide use (Bailey et al., 2018; Martincorena et al., 2017). One
might surmise from this that high-mutation-frequency pro-
cesses are more prone to generating hotspots, reﬂecting
greater variability in their base-wise mutation frequencies.
The LNP framework provides a natural way of quantifying both
the mutation frequency and variability of different mutational pro-
cesses. We ﬁt the model to all bases-at-risk for each process;
the log-normal parameters em and es are equal to the geometric
mean and geometric standard deviation, respectively, of the
base-wise mutation frequency. The geometric mean is simply
equivalent to the median of the log-normal distribution. The geo-
metric standard deviation es is a dimensionless scale factor indi-
cating the average multiplicative distance from the mean; for
example, es = 2 signiﬁes that at 1 standard deviation above the
mean, bases will be twice as mutable as the average. At its min-
imum value es = 1, there is no variability. Hence, the same value
of es indicates an equivalent amount of base-wise variability,
irrespective of mutation frequency. Our fully Bayesian model
ﬁnds not only the optimal values of em and es, but also the pos-
terior distributions of these parameters. In general, mutational
processes that generate few mutations will have high posterior
uncertainty, while processes that generate many mutations will
have lower uncertainty.
We selected the following eight mutational processes to
examine using the LNP model because they are mostly of known
causes and very speciﬁc to certain patients and sequence con-
texts, making assignments of patients to these signatures unam-
biguous: APOBEC (3A+3B, COSMIC Signatures 2 and 13), aging
(spontaneous methylated-CpG deamination, COSMIC Sig. 1),
esophageal (Dulak et al., 2013) (COSMIC Sig. 17), MSI (COSMIC
Sig. 6), POLE (COSMIC Sig. 10), POLE + MSI (Haradhvala et al.,
2018) (COSMIC Sig. 14), smoking (COSMIC Sig. 4), and UV (UV-
A only, COSMIC Sig. 7). We used SignatureAnalyzer (Kim et al.,
2016), which is based on a Bayesian implementation of non-
negative matrix factorization, to infer the probabilities of each
mutation being assigned to each process. We then identiﬁed 8
subcohorts of patients (each comprising between 44 and 4,739
patients) in which each of these processes dominated (R75%
assignment probability) at their relevant sequence contexts
(e.g., C/T mutations at CpG sites for aging). The mutational
spectra of these subcohorts are shown in Figure S4. For each
Fraction of synonymous exonic positions
Obs./Exp.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
10 -10
10 -8
10 -6
10 -4
10 -2
0.97
10 0
10 1
10 2
10 3
Number of mutated patients
Number of mutated patients
0
10 -40
10 -35
10 -30
10 -25
10 -20
10 -15
10 -10
10 -5
10 0
Prob(# mutations at each site)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
Confident driver events
Confident passenger events
Log-normal-Poisson
Gamma-Poisson
Uniform Poisson
Uniform-within-gene
Predicted fractions
Observed fractions
TP53 
L194R
KRAS 
Q61H
RIMS2 
S454S
SPTA1 
K1732T
EGFR 
L62R
TTN 
E16119D
q > 0.1
< 1 exp. mutated site
A
B
Significance
Figure 3. Predicted Frequencies of Recurrent Mutations According to the Four Methods
(A) Fraction of synonymous hotspot mutations observed in multiple patients (0–15; total cohort size 9,023). Colored lines represent the expected fraction of sites
as predicted by each of the four models; dashed black lines represent the observed fractions. The ratios of observed:expected fractions for each model are
plotted above each recurrence level. Log-normal-Poisson model best matches the observed fractions. The gray region indicates a fraction corresponding to <1
base pair of synonymous exonic territory (21.4 million possible base pair substitutions that could yield a synonymous codon change).
(B) Probabilities of observing every mutation in sequence context A(A/C)G as predicted by the four models; each dot corresponds to an observed mutation.
Lines connect the different models’ predictions for the same mutation; blue lines highlight conﬁdent driver mutations, while red lines highlight conﬁdent passenger
mutations. The gray region indicates model predictions with a q value > 0.1 (i.e., non-signiﬁcant recurrence), indicating that, while driver hotspot mutations are
signiﬁcant by all models, only the Log-normal-Poisson model correctly infers passenger hotspot mutations as non-signiﬁcant.
Cancer Cell 36, 288–301, September 16, 2019
295

of these ‘‘process-centric’’ subcohorts, we ﬁt the LNP model to
the relevant contexts.
We plotted the posterior distributions of em and es for each
pentamer context belonging to the eight mutational pro-
cesses to test whether processes with higher mutation fre-
quencies also have higher base-wise variability. To our sur-
prise, our results show that, despite extreme heterogeneity
in overall mutation frequency (spanning nearly 5 orders of
magnitude),
most
mutational
processes
show
a
similar
amount of non-zero base-wise variability (Figure 5A), with es
approximately between 2 and 3.
Notably, the only exception was the esophageal mutational
process, which showed the highest variability despite having
one of the lowest mutation frequencies. This may indicate
that additional yet-undiscovered factors may correspond to
elevated mutability at speciﬁc bases-at-risk for this process.
It
was
recently
reported
that
the
esophageal
signature
disproportionately mutates positions within CTCF binding
sites (Katainen et al., 2015), possibly due to bound CTCF
transcription factors occluding damaged bases from repair
processes.
To test whether variability was independent of mutation
rate even within individual processes, we partitioned the
high mutation frequency processes between hypermutated
samples (top decile of mutation frequency) and non-hyper-
mutants,
and
compared
their
es
values.
We
observed
similar levels of base-wise variability between the two parti-
tions (Figure S5A), indicating that there is nothing unusual
about the distribution of mutations in hypermutants, and
nothing that should warrant their exclusion in signiﬁcance
analyses.
Explanatory Power of Genomic Covariates Differs
among Mutational Processes
Although we previously showed in the Uniform Poisson regres-
sion model analysis that genomic covariates cannot fully
explain all base-wise mutational variability, their explanatory
power is non-zero. The LNP model provides a natural way to
quantify the contribution of each covariate toward explaining
this variability: the amount that es decreases as we incorporate
RXRA
MB21D2*
ERCC2
SLC27A5
OXA1L
BCL2L12
SOX17
PDE3A*
SPTLC3
PCBP1
STK19
C3orf70*
EEF1A1
RQCD1
SUCO
Gene
LNP q value
0
5
10
15
Number of mutations
Adrenocortical
Bladder
Breast
Cervical
Colon
DLBCL
Esophageal
Glioblastoma
Head and neck
Kidney renal
Kidney papillary
Low grade glioma
Liver
Lung adenocarcinoma
Lung squamous
Mesothelioma
Pancreatic
Paraganglioma
Prostate
Rectal
Sarcoma
Skin melanoma
Stomach
Testicular
Thyroid
Uterine
10 -1
10 -3
10 -5
10 -7
Figure 4. The Top 15 Non-KCGs with Signiﬁcant Hot-
spots by the LNP Model (q < 0.1) Segregated by Tumor
Type
For each non-KCG-containing signiﬁcant hotspots, we indi-
cate the total number of mutated patients within each tumor
type at all signiﬁcant hotspots. Genes in bold have been
previously experimentally characterized as cancer genes but
are not in the CGC. Genes marked with a star have hotspots
that occur at optimal APOBEC3A hairpin substrate sequences
and are likely passengers. See also Tables S2 and S4, and
Figure S3.
additional covariates corresponds directly to the
variance explained by the added covariates. The
value of es after all covariates have been incorpo-
rated is the unexplained variance, which would
approach es = 1 if the covariates completely
explained the base-wise variability, because there
would be no extra variance beyond what the covariates
predict.
We grouped the covariates by genomic scale: replication
timing and expression (Lawrence et al., 2013) inﬂuence mutation
frequencies on a coarse scale (100 kbp–1 Mbp), while nucleo-
some positions and DNase hypersensitivity inﬂuence mutation
frequencies on a ﬁne scale (10 bp). We also quantiﬁed the ef-
fect of accounting for pentamer context speciﬁcity on mutation
frequency (i.e., considering the ﬂanking ±2 upstream/down-
stream positions in addition to the immediate 5ʹ/30 positions).
In Figure 5B, we plot the amount of total variance explained by
the aforementioned covariate sets and the amount of remaining
unexplained variance for each of the trinucleotide contexts asso-
ciated with each mutational signature. From this analysis, the
following universal patterns stand out: (1) unexplained variance
is higher than explained variance; (2) pentamer contexts are
almost always important (with the notable exception of the aging
signature); and (3) there is no correlation between the amount of
unexplained variance and the amount of explained variance, and
processes with more total variance do not necessarily have more
variance explained by covariates.
There are likely yet-undiscovered properties of the genome
that affect mutability. For example, we examined the effect of
adding XR-seq coverage (Hu et al., 2015)—an extrinsic mea-
surement of nucleotide excision repair (NER) activity, used to
repair pyrimidine dimers resulting from UV damage—as a covar-
iate in our model. We found that this covariate explained an
average additional 10% of variance in the UV subcohort (Fig-
ure S5B), indicating that many passenger UV hotspots occur at
loci predictably refractory to NER. However, the intrinsic
genomic properties that determine amenability to NER are
unknown.
For certain processes, standard genomic covariates are
completely non-explanatory. Although certain APOBEC trinucle-
otides display considerable variability among pentamer contexts
(Chan et al., 2015), neither coarse nor ﬁne covariates explain any
additional variability. However, Buisson et al. (2019) recently
showed that the APOBEC3A (A3A) cytidine deaminase preferen-
tially targets DNA hairpin loops. Cytosines residing at optimal
hairpin loop positions/motifs can show a >2003 increase
296
Cancer Cell 36, 288–301, September 16, 2019

Figure 5. Comparison of the Heterogeneity of Base-Wise Mutability for Different Mutational Processes as Inferred by the Log-Normal-
Poisson Model
(A) Log-normal-Poisson posterior distributions of base-wise mutation frequency (median mutations per million sites em) and mutations’ deviation from being
uniformly Poisson distributed (geometric standard deviation es) for different mutational processes. Each colored area represents the posterior 95% conﬁdence
region for a pentamer context associated with a given mutational process (Figure S4). es = 1 corresponds to uniformly Poisson distributed mutations. Since es>1
for all processes, we see that base-wise variability is universal and pervasive. Marginal distributions of em and es are shown below and to the right of the plot,
respectively. Lines within each region are principal axes of the posterior density (i.e., eigenvectors of the covariance matrix of the estimated posterior density).
(B) Amount of base-wise mutation rate variability es explained by model covariates (colored), and remaining unexplained variance after all covariates have been
incorporated (gray), for each relevant trinucleotide context in each mutational process.
See also Figures S4 and S5.
Cancer Cell 36, 288–301, September 16, 2019
297

in A3A-induced mutation rate. Incorporating A3A substrate
optimality, as deﬁned in Buisson et al. (2019), as a covariate
into our model removes several A3A mutational hotspots from
signiﬁcance (Figure S5C, Table S2).
Conversely, coarse covariates—namely gene expression—
explain a substantial amount of smoking mutational variability.
This is expected since the C/A mutations comprising the
smoking signature are caused by benzo[a]pyrene guanine ad-
ducts (Denissenko et al., 1996), which are often corrected by
transcription-coupled repair (Fousteri and Mullenders, 2008),
which occurs more frequently in highly expressed genes (Pleas-
ance et al., 2010).
DISCUSSION
Discovering cancer drivers from sequencing data requires over-
coming the problem of detecting signal (mutational recurrence)
above a background of non-random noise (variable intrinsic
mutability). We detect drivers by statistically modeling this back-
ground and looking for recurrence that signiﬁcantly exceeds it.
This approach is only fruitful if the underlying model is accurate.
As the corpus of cancer genomes has exponentially grown over
the last decade, we have become statistically powered to
observe background mutational variability at increasingly ﬁne
genomic scales, which we must accordingly account for in our
background models. Initially, around 2007, cohorts were so
small (10 patients) that we lacked the power to observe any
variability at all, although we suggested that this might indeed
be the case (Getz et al., 2007). Thus, models assumed that every
genomic region was equally mutable, and that all recurrent mu-
tation stemmed from positive selection (Sjo¨ blom et al., 2006). As
cohorts grew to 1,000 patients, around 2013, we became pow-
ered to observe heterogeneity on the scale of a gene, and infer
that most recurrently mutated genes were actually passengers
with high intrinsic mutability. However, cohorts were still too
small to estimate mutability on levels smaller than a gene, so
models did not account for it. This led to the assumption that
any base pair recurrently mutated beyond the overall back-
ground level of its gene had to be a driver (Van den Eynden
et al., 2015; Lohr et al., 2012; Lawrence et al., 2014; Chang
et al., 2016; Araya et al., 2016; Baeissa et al., 2017).
We are able to challenge this assumption in the current era of
cohorts comprising 10,000 patients, which powers us to esti-
mate background mutability on the smallest possible genomic
scale: that of the individual base pair. Here, we demonstrate
that base-wise mutational variability is so extreme that a large
proportion of recurrently mutated base pairs in non-KCGs are
in fact passengers. Unlike most hotspots found signiﬁcant by
our LNP model, most signiﬁcant hotspots under the two toy
models we compare it against (Uniform-within-gene and Uniform
Poisson) are under no positive selection by orthogonal criteria.
Although our toy models are merely illustrative, many recently
published algorithms intended for actual driver discovery (both at
the gene and site level) do not account for base-wise variability in
their background models. Using these naive models, various
groups reported lists of signiﬁcant genes or hotspots with many
likely false-positives. Our own MutSigCL method (Lawrence
et al., 2014), which analyzes mutational clustering on the gene
level, reports a long list of signiﬁcant genes at FDR < 10%
when run on the cohort analyzed here, some of which fall in our
false-positive truth set. Likewise, the statistical model used in
another study (Chang et al., 2016) yielded 1,202 signiﬁcant hot-
spots at FDR < 1%, which required additional analyses and
manual review to yield a ﬁnal report of 470 hotspots. Since
FDRs are only meaningful if their underlying statistics are well
calibrated, rigorous validation of the statistical models should
be performed whenever the signiﬁcance levels are overly conﬁ-
dent. Failure to do so has potentially severe consequences
in situations like identifying genes for deep experimental follow-
up or as drug targets. Owing to the substantial cost of such
follow-up experiments, properly accounting for base-wise vari-
ability is essential when selecting these candidates to avoid
wasting valuable scientiﬁc resources on passenger hotspots.
In addition to providing an improved model for assessing
mutational signiﬁcance, our LNP model also sheds light on the
fundamental nature of mutagenesis. It has long been known
that
background
mutability
correlates
with
coarse-scale
genomic features, and more recent studies have shown that spe-
ciﬁc ﬁne-scale genomic features undergo localized increased
mutability (Mao et al., 2018; Poulos et al., 2016; Sabarinathan
et al., 2016; Katainen et al., 2015). We show here that neither
of these factors can explain the amount of observed base-wise
variability, suggesting that there are yet-undiscovered properties
of the genome that affect mutability. These may include: (1) other
secondary/tertiary DNA structural motifs (Harteis and Schneider,
2014; Georgakopoulos-Soares et al., 2018); (2) yet-unknown
proteins bound to the DNA; (3) a combination of the two (e.g.,
binding of ETS transcription factors has been shown to rotate
adjacent pyrimidines into a more favorable conformation to
form a cyclobutane dimer [Mao et al., 2018]); (4) local chromatin
structure (which could affect gene expression or accessibility to
mutagens or repair enzymes); or (5) sequence-speciﬁc polymer-
ase error modes that our datasets are not yet powered to detect.
Accounting for all potential covariates, however, may never be
able to fully explain the observed variability since the mutations
we observe in a tumor genome are merely a snapshot of the
aggregated effect of many ﬂuctuating mutational processes
that have been active over the course of the tumor’s life history.
These processes’ activity levels and bases-at-risk vary as a
function of continuously changing factors, such as the tumor’s
microenvironment, mutagen exposure, or epigenetic state,
which are complicated to model with static covariates. We prob-
abilistically represent the unexplained variability with a log-
normal distribution because it represents the net product of
consecutive molecular events. The log-normal distribution has
theoretical justiﬁcation and currently best ﬁts the observed
data. But, as datasets grow in size, increasing our power to
distinguish low-frequency drivers from background, we also
become more powered to infer the distribution of background
mutability, which may require us to further reﬁne our probabilistic
models.
Regardless of the underlying causes of the dramatic heteroge-
neity we observe in base-wise mutability, its existence has
implications in the ﬁelds of molecular evolution and population
genetics. We ﬁnd that base-wise heterogeneity is pervasive
across all mutational processes, including methylated-CpG
deamination, which is overwhelmingly responsible for de novo
germline mutations (Ehrlich and Wang, 1981; Hodgkinson and
298
Cancer Cell 36, 288–301, September 16, 2019

Eyre-Walker, 2011). This suggests that the inﬁnite-sites model
underpinning many assumptions in population genetics may
be incorrect—for instance, the probability of identical alleles in
multiple unrelated individuals originating from different common
ancestors may be much higher than a naive coalescent theory
would predict. Many somatic methods also rely on the inﬁnite-
sites model; for example, tools for clonal structure inference
often impose a hard constraint that the same mutation can never
arise in multiple subclones independently.
In addition, large-scale genomic organization has been
thought to reﬂect coarse variability in background mutability
(Chuang and Li, 2004), wherein genes more tolerant of mutation
are thought to reside in more highly mutable regions of the
genome. Variability at the base pair level may equivalently
mold genomic architecture on ﬁne scales. For example, it has
long been speculated that the sequence composition of immu-
noglobulin variable chains is speciﬁcally biased to induce AID
hypermutation hotspots at positions that accelerate the process
of antigen selection (Jolly et al., 1996). Genome-wide selective
pressure may be analogously guided or constrained due to
variable site-speciﬁc mutability.
In conclusion, further growth of cancer sequencing datasets
will allow us to survey the landscape of drivers with even greater
precision, reveal the intricacies of mutational processes, and
even elucidate how these mutational processes shape evolu-
tionary selection. But, as datasets continually grow and evolve,
so must our methods and the conclusions we draw from them.
STAR+METHODS
Detailed methods are provided in the online version of this paper
and include the following:
d KEY RESOURCES TABLE
d LEAD CONTACT AND MATERIALS AVAILABILITY
d METHOD DETAILS
B Mutation Calling and QC
B Deﬁnition of Known Cancer Genes
d QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
B Calculating Expected Coding Effect Fractions
B Gene dN/dS Calculation
B Description of Signiﬁcance Methods
B MCMC Implementation
d DATA AND CODE AVAILABILITY
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental Information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ccell.2019.08.002.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Daniel Rosebrock and Dimitri Livitz for providing MYC absolute
copy-number calls, Yosef E. Maruvka for providing microsatellite indel calls
with respect to UPF2 mutant status, Esther Rheinbay for providing TFBS activ-
ity and chromatin state tracks, as well as Chip Stewart and Barry Taylor for
helpful comments and fruitful discussion on the manuscript. J.M.H. and
G.G.
were
partially
funded
by
NCI
GDAC
grants
(U24CA143845,
U24CA210999). M.S.L. was partially funded by G.G. funds at the Broad Insti-
tute and M.S.L. startup funds at Massachusetts General Hospital. G.G. was
partially funded by Paul C. Zamecnik Chair in Oncology, MGH Cancer Center.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Conceptualization,
J.M.H.,
M.S.L.,
and
G.G.;
Methodology,
J.M.H.
and G.G.; Software, J.M.H.; Formal Analysis and Investigation, J.M.H.;
SignatureAnalyzer Results, J.K.; Data Curation, J.M.H., M.S.L., and A.B.;
Visualization, J.M.H.; Writing – Original Draft, J.M.H., M.S.L., and G.G.;
Writing – Review & Editing, G.G., M.S.L., M.M., A.T.-W., and N.J.H.; Super-
vision, G.G. and M.S.L.; Funding Acquisition, G.G.
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
G.G. receives research funds from IBM and Pharmacyclics. G.G. is an inventor
on
patent
applications
related
to
MuTect,
MutSig,
ABSOLUTE,
and
POLYSOLVER. M.S.L. is an inventor on patent applications related to MuTect
and MutSig.
Received: November 21, 2018
Revised: May 15, 2019
Accepted: August 6, 2019
Published: September 16, 2019
REFERENCES
Araya, C.L., Cenik, C., Reuter, J.A., Kiss, G., Pande, V.S., Snyder, M.P., and
Greenleaf, W.J. (2016). Identiﬁcation of signiﬁcantly mutated regions across
cancer types highlights a rich landscape of functional molecular alterations.
Nat. Genet. 48, 117–125.
Baeissa, H., Benstead-Hume, G., Richardson, C.J., and Pearl, F.M.G. (2017).
Identiﬁcation and analysis of mutational hotspots in oncogenes and tumour
suppressors. Oncotarget 8, 21290–21304.
Bailey, M.H., Tokheim, C., Porta-Pardo, E., Sengupta, S., Bertrand, D.,
Weerasinghe, A., Colaprico, A., Wendl, M.C., Kim, J., Reardon, B., et al.
(2018). Comprehensive characterization of cancer driver genes and mutations.
Cell 173, 371–385.e18.
Buisson, R., Langenbucher, A., Bowen, D., Kwan, E.E., Benes, C.H., Zou, L.,
and Lawrence, M.S. (2019). Passenger hotspot mutations in cancer driven
by APOBEC3A and mesoscale genomic features. Science 364, https://doi.
org/10.1126/science.aaw2872.
Cairns, J. (1975). Mutation selection and the natural history of cancer. Nature
255, 197–200.
Chan, K., Roberts, S.A., Klimczak, L.J., Sterling, J.F., Saini, N., Malc, E.P., Kim,
J., Kwiatkowski, D.J., Fargo, D.C., Mieczkowski, P.A., et al. (2015). An
APOBEC3A hypermutation signature is distinguishable from the signature of
background mutagenesis by APOBEC3B in human cancers. Nat. Genet. 47,
1067–1072.
Chang, M.T., Asthana, S., Gao, S.P., Lee, B.H., Chapman, J.S., Kandoth, C.,
Gao, J.J., Socci, N.D., Solit, D.B., Olshen, A.B., et al. (2016). Identifying recur-
rent mutations in cancer reveals widespread lineage diversity and mutational
speciﬁcity. Nat. Biotechnol. 34, 155–163.
Chuang, J.H., and Li, H. (2004). Functional bias and spatial organization of
genes in mutational hot and cold regions in the human genome. PLoS Biol.
2, 253–263.
Cibulskis, K., Lawrence, M.S., Carter, S.L., Sivachenko, A., Jaffe, D., Sougnez,
C., Gabriel, S., Meyerson, M., Lander, E.S., and Getz, G. (2013). Sensitive
detection of somatic point mutations in impure and heterogeneous cancer
samples. Nat. Biotechnol. 31, 213–219.
Costello, M., Pugh, T.J., Fennell, T.J., Stewart, C., Lichtenstein, L., Meldrim,
J.C., Fostel, J.L., Friedrich, D.C., Perrin, D., Dionne, D., et al. (2013).
Discovery and characterization of artifactual mutations in deep coverage tar-
geted capture sequencing data due to oxidative DNA damage during sample
preparation. Nucleic Acids Res. 41, e67.
Dees, N.D., Zhang, Q., Kandoth, C., Wendl, M.C., Schierding, W., Koboldt,
D.C., Mooney, T.B., Callaway, M.B., Dooling, D., Mardis, E.R., et al. (2012).
MuSiC: identifying mutational signiﬁcance in cancer genomes. Genome Res.
22, 1589–1598.
Cancer Cell 36, 288–301, September 16, 2019
299

Denissenko, M.F., Pao, A., Tang, M., and Pfeifer, G.P. (1996). Preferential
formation of benzo[a]pyrene adducts at lung cancer mutational hotspots in
P53. Science 274, 430–432.
Derrien, T., Estelle´ , J., Marco Sola, S., Knowles, D.G., Raineri, E., Guigo´ , R.,
and Ribeca, P. (2012). Fast computation and applications of genome mapp-
ability. PLoS One 7, e30377.
Dulak, A.M., Stojanov, P., Peng, S., Lawrence, M.S., Fox, C., Stewart, C.,
Bandla, S., Imamura, Y., Schumacher, S.E., Sheﬂer, E., et al. (2013). Exome
and whole-genome sequencing of esophageal adenocarcinoma identiﬁes
recurrent driver events and mutational complexity. Nat. Genet. 45, 478–486.
Ehrlich, M., and Wang, R.Y. (1981). 5-Methylcytosine in eukaryotic DNA.
Science 212, 1350–1357.
Ellrott, K., Bailey, M.H., Saksena, G., Covington, K.R., Kandoth, C., Stewart,
C., Hess, J., Ma, S., Chiotti, K.E., McLellan, M., et al. (2018). Scalable open sci-
ence approach for mutation calling of tumor exomes using multiple genomic
pipelines. Cell Syst. 6, 271–281.e7.
Fousteri, M., and Mullenders, L.H.F. (2008). Transcription-coupled nucleotide
excision repair in mammalian cells: molecular mechanisms and biological ef-
fects. Cell Res. 18, 73–84.
Futreal, P.A., Coin, L., Marshall, M., Down, T., Hubbard, T., Wooster, R.,
Rahman, N., and Stratton, M.R. (2004). A census of human cancer genes.
Nat. Rev. Cancer 4, 177–183.
Georgakopoulos-Soares, I., Morganella, S., Jain, N., Hemberg, M., and
Nik-Zainal, S. (2018). Noncanonical secondary structures arising from
non-B DNA motifs are determinants of mutagenesis. Genome Res. 28,
1264–1271.
Gerstein, M.B., Kundaje, A., Hariharan, M., Landt, S.G., Yan, K.K., Cheng, C.,
Mu, X.J., Khurana, E., Rozowsky, J., Alexander, R., et al. (2012). Architecture of
the
human
regulatory
network
derived
from
ENCODE
data.
Nature
489, 91–100.
Getz, G., Ho¨ ﬂing, H., Mesirov, J.P., Golub, T.R., Meyerson, M., Tibshirani, R.,
and Lander, E.S. (2007). Comment on ‘‘The consensus coding sequences of
human breast and colorectal cancers’’. Science 317, 1500.
Greenman, C., Wooster, R., Futreal, P.A., Stratton, M.R., and Easton, D.F.
(2006). Statistical analysis of pathogenicity of somatic mutations in cancer.
Genetics 173, 2187–2198.
Haradhvala, N.J., Kim, J., Maruvka, Y.E., Polak, P., Rosebrock, D., Livitz, D.,
Hess, J.M., Leshchiner, I., Kamburov, A., Mouw, K.W., et al. (2018). Distinct
mutational signatures characterize concurrent loss of polymerase proof-
reading and mismatch repair. Nat. Commun. 9, 1746.
Harteis, S., and Schneider, S. (2014). Making the bend: DNA tertiary structure
and protein-DNA interactions. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 15, 12335–12363.
Hodgkinson, A., and Eyre-Walker, A. (2011). Variation in the mutation rate
across mammalian genomes. Nat. Rev. Genet. 12, 756–766.
Hu, J., Adar, S., Selby, C.P., Lieb, J.D., and Sancar, A. (2015). Genome-
wide
analysis
of
human
global
and
transcription-coupled
excision
repair of UV damage at single-nucleotide resolution. Genes Dev. 29,
948–960.
Imielinski, M., Guo, G., and Meyerson, M. (2017). Insertions and deletions
target lineage-deﬁning genes in human cancers. Cell 168, 460–472.e14.
Jolly, C.J., Wagner, S.D., Rada, C., Klix, N., Milstein, C., and Neuberger,
M.S. (1996). The targeting of somatic hypermutation. Semin. Immunol. 8,
159–168.
Katainen, R., Dave, K., Pitk€anen, E., Palin, K., Kivioja, T., V€alim€aki, N., Gylfe,
A.E., Ristolainen, H., H€anninen, U.A., Cajuso, T., et al. (2015). CTCF/cohe-
sin-binding sites are frequently mutated in cancer. Nat. Genet. 47, 818–821.
Katz, L., and Burge, C.B. (2003). Widespread selection for local RNA second-
ary structure in coding regions of bacterial genes. Genome Res. 13,
2042–2051.
Kim, J., Mouw, K.W., Polak, P., Braunstein, L.Z., Kamburov, A., Tiao, G.,
Kwiatkowski, D.J., Rosenberg, J.E., Van Allen, E.M., D’Andrea, A.D., et al.
(2016). Somatic ERCC2 mutations are associated with a distinct genomic
signature in urothelial tumors. Nat. Genet. 48, 600–606.
Kimura, M. (1977). Preponderance of synonymous changes as evidence for
the neutral theory of molecular evolution. Nature 267, 275–276.
Lawrence, M.S., Stojanov, P., Mermel, C.H., Robinson, J.T., Garraway, L.A.,
Golub, T.R., Meyerson, M., Gabriel, S.B., Lander, E.S., and Getz, G. (2014).
Discovery and saturation analysis of cancer genes across 21 tumour types.
Nature 505, 495–501.
Lawrence, M.S., Stojanov, P., Polak, P., Kryukov, G.V., Cibulskis, K.,
Sivachenko, A., Carter, S.L., Stewart, C., Mermel, C.H., Roberts, S.A., et al.
(2013). Mutational heterogeneity in cancer and the search for new cancer-
associated genes. Nature 499, 214–218.
Lek, M., Karczewski, K.J., Minikel, E.V., Samocha, K.E., Banks, E., Fennell, T.,
O’Donnell-Luria, A.H., Ware, J.S., Hill, A.J., Cummings, B.B., et al. (2016).
Analysis of protein-coding genetic variation in 60,706 humans. Nature 536,
285–291.
Lohr, J.G., Stojanov, P., Lawrence, M.S., Auclair, D., Chapuy, B., Sougnez, C.,
Cruz-Gordillo, P., Knoechel, B., Asmann, Y.W., Slager, S.L., et al. (2012).
Discovery and prioritization of somatic mutations in diffuse large B-cell lym-
phoma (DLBCL) by whole-exome sequencing. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A
109, 3879–3884.
Mao, P., Brown, A.J., Esaki, S., Lockwood, S., Poon, G.M.K., Smerdon, M.J.,
Roberts, S.A., and Wyrick, J.J. (2018). ETS transcription factors induce a
unique UV damage signature that drives recurrent mutagenesis in melanoma.
Nat. Commun. 9, 2626.
Martincorena, I., Raine, K.M., Gerstung, M., Dawson, K.J., Haase, K., Van Loo,
P., Davies, H., Stratton, M.R., and Campbell, P.J. (2017). Universal patterns of
selection in cancer and somatic tissues. Cell 171, 1029–1041.e21.
Miller, M.L., Reznik, E., Gauthier, N.P., Aksoy, B.A., Korkut, A., Gao, J., Ciriello,
G., Schultz, N., and Sander, C. (2015). Pan-cancer analysis of mutation hot-
spots in protein domains. Cell Syst. 1, 197–209.
Mitsui, J., and Tsuji, S. (2012). Common chromosomal fragile sites: breakages
and rearrangements in somatic and germline cells. Atlas Genet. Cytogenet.
Oncol. Haematol. https://doi.org/10.4267/2042/46078.
Nei, M., and Gojobori, T. (1986). Simple methods for estimating the numbers of
synonymous and nonsynonymous nucleotide substitutions. Mol. Biol. Evol. 3,
418–426.
Pleasance, E.D., Cheetham, R.K., Stephens, P.J., McBride, D.J., Humphray,
S.J., Greenman, C.D., Varela, I., Lin, M.L., Ordo´ n˜ ez, G.R., Bignell, G.R.,
et al. (2010). A comprehensive catalogue of somatic mutations from a human
cancer genome. Nature 463, 191–196.
Polak, P., Karlic, R., Koren, A., Thurman, R., Sandstrom, R., Lawrence, M.S.,
Reynolds, A., Rynes, E., Vlahovicek, K., Stamatoyannopoulos, J.A., et al.
(2015). Cell-of-origin chromatin organization shapes the mutational landscape
of cancer. Nature 518, 360–364.
Poulos, R.C., Thoms, J.A.I., Guan, Y.F., Unnikrishnan, A., Pimanda, J.E., and
Wong, J.W.H. (2016). Functional mutations form at CTCF-cohesin binding
sites in melanoma due to uneven nucleotide excision repair across the motif.
Cell Rep. 17, 2865–2872.
Quax, T.E.F., Claassens, N.J., So¨ ll, D., and van der Oost, J. (2015). Codon bias
as a means to ﬁne-tune gene expression. Mol. Cell 59, 149–161.
Sabarinathan, R., Mularoni, L., Deu-Pons, J., Gonzalez-Perez, A., and Lopez-
Bigas, N. (2016). Nucleotide excision repair is impaired by binding of transcrip-
tion factors to DNA. Nature 532, 264–267.
Schrock, M.S., and Huebner, K. (2015). WWOX: a fragile tumor suppressor.
Exp. Biol. Med. 240, 296–304.
Sjo¨ blom, T., Jones, S., Wood, L.D., Parsons, D.W., Lin, J., Barber, T.D.,
Mandelker, D., Leary, R.J., Ptak, J., Silliman, N., et al. (2006). The consensus
coding sequences of human breast and colorectal cancers. Science 314,
268–274.
Smith, T.C.A., Carr, A.M., and Eyre-Walker, A.C. (2016). Are sites with multiple
single nucleotide variants in cancer genomes a consequence of drivers, hyper-
mutable sites or sequencing errors? PeerJ 4, e2391.
Stamatoyannopoulos, J.A., Adzhubei, I., Thurman, R.E., Kryukov, G.V., Mirkin,
S.M., and Sunyaev, S.R. (2009). Human mutation rate associated with DNA
replication timing. Nat. Genet. 41, 393–395.
300
Cancer Cell 36, 288–301, September 16, 2019

Stratton, M.R., Campbell, P.J., and Futreal, P.A. (2009). The cancer genome.
Nature 458, 719–724.
Supek, F., Min˜ ana, B., Valca´ rcel, J., Gabaldo´ n, T., and Lehner, B. (2014).
Synonymous mutations frequently act as driver mutations in human cancers.
Cell 156, 1324–1335.
Sutton, J. (1997). Gibrat’s legacy. J. Econ. Lit. 35, 40–59.
Van den Eynden, J., Fierro, A.C., Verbeke, L.P.C., and Marchal, K. (2015).
SomInaClust: detection of cancer genes based on somatic mutation patterns
of inactivation and clustering. BMC Bioinformatics 16, 1–12.
Weghorn, D., and Sunyaev, S. (2017). Bayesian inference of negative and pos-
itive selection in human cancers. Nat. Genet. 49, 1785–1788.
Cancer Cell 36, 288–301, September 16, 2019
301

STAR+METHODS
KEY RESOURCES TABLE
LEAD CONTACT AND MATERIALS AVAILABILITY
Inquiries on materials availability should be directed to corresponding author Gad Getz (gadgetz@broadinstitute.org).
Both the exact TCGA MC3 mutation calls used in this paper and the BAM ﬁles used to generate/QC them are protected data,
requiring appropriate dbGaP authorization to access. We have also included a link to an unprotected version of the MC3 callset
that will yield essentially identical results.
METHOD DETAILS
Mutation Calling and QC
We obtained the MC3 TCGA mutation calls from Synapse, a cohort comprising 10,510 unique patients (3,850,525 somatic single-
nucleotide variations [sSNVs] called by two or more mutation callers) before ﬁltering. MC3 is a curated set of high-quality mutation
calls run through numerous QC ﬁlters with failing samples/mutations annotated in the mutation annotation ﬁle (MAF), allowing the end
user to exclude them.
We excluded all patients failing MC3 sample-level ﬁlters (i) excessive cross-sample contamination (MAF ﬁlter contest); (ii) whole
genome ampliﬁed libraries (MAF ﬁlters wga_only, native_wga_mix); and (iii) bad sequencing runs due to mid-run sequencer fail-
ure (MAF ﬁlter badseq). This left us with a cohort of 9,023 patients, from which we further excluded mutations failing the following
MC3 site-level ﬁlters:
(i) Panel-of-normals (PoN): for each genomic position, the PoN encodes the distribution of alternate read fractions (AFs) across z
8,000 TCGA normals. We removed candidate variant calls that occurred at sites recurrently harboring alternate reads across
the PoN whose AFs were consistent with the candidate variant. For a full description of the panel-of-normals ﬁlter, see the Sup-
plemental Information of (Ellrott et al., 2018). (MAF ﬁlter broad_PoN_v2).
(ii) ExAC: site appeared in ExAC (Lek et al., 2016) (z 60,000 normal samples) with allele count R 50. This gave us greater power
than the PoN to ﬁlter germline polymorphisms somehow missing from the matched normal. (MAF ﬁlter common_in_exac).
(iii) Low normal coverage: sequencing coverage of the matched normal at the position of the somatic variant was fewer than eight
reads, making it difﬁcult to distinguish the somatic call from a rare germline polymorphism. (MAF ﬁlter ndp)
(iv) OxoG: variant was likely a sequencing artifact caused by oxidative damage during shearing in library preparation. For a full
description of this artifact mode, see (Costello et al., 2013). (MAF ﬁlter oxog).
In total, 861,664 failing mutations were excluded, leaving us with 2,988,861 passing sSNVs.
In addition to removing MC3 ﬂagged calls, we applied two additional ﬁlters not employed in MC3:
(i) We performed another round of PoN ﬁltering using a panel comprising exomes captured using Illumina’s ICE protocol, which
was used only for TCGA samples sequenced late in the project. The ICE protocol introduces recurrent artifacts not observed in
exomes captured using Agilent’s capture kit, which was used for the majority of TCGA and comprises the entirety of the PoN
used by MC3.
(ii) We found that many recurrent mutations were in fact false positives caused by read misalignments, verifying this by BLATing
reads supporting the variant calls and seeing that they mapped with fewer mismatches elsewhere in the reference genome. To
REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
Software and Algorithms
Log-normal-Poisson regression algorithm
This paper
https://github.com/broadinstitute/getzlab-LNP
Code to reproduce this paper’s ﬁgures and analyses
This paper
https://github.com/broadinstitute/getzlab-PHS
Other
TCGA MC3 somatic mutation callset (protected)
TCGA
https://www.synapse.org/#!Synapse:syn5917256
TCGA MC3 somatic mutation callset (unprotected)
TCGA
https://www.synapse.org/#!Synapse:syn7824274
TCGA hg19 BAM ﬁles
TCGA
https://portal.gdc.cancer.gov/legacy-archive/
e1
Cancer Cell 36, 288–301.e1–e14, September 16, 2019

mitigate this problem, we excluded calls in 75mer windows (chosen to match the typical read length of TCGA exomes) that
were not completely unique (Derrien et al., 2012) in the reference.
This left us with 2,288,080 analysis-ready sSNVs.
Finally, we annotated all mutations’ gene names and protein-coding effects according to our own transcript deﬁnitions, namely all
GENCODE v19 protein coding transcripts with unambiguous translation start/stop sites and splice sites.
We re-annotated because accurate calculation of dN/dS (STAR Methods, Gene dN/dS Calculation) requires knowing the precise
number of sequence contexts in each gene that can give rise to each coding effect (e.g., number of T(C/T)G sites that yield syn-
onymous mutations), weighted by sequencing coverage across the cohort. Such exact transcript deﬁnitions were unavailable in
MC3, whose calls were annotated using a pipeline that does not expose them. We weighted sequence context/protein coding effect
territory by coverage because some context/effect combinations, although nominally possible based on a gene’s open rading frame
(ORF) sequence, occur at positions that consistently lack sequencing coverage, thereby deﬂating mutation frequency estimates. For
each coding position, we computed the fraction of sufﬁciently covered tumor/normal pairs across 7,732 TCGA whole exome pairs.
We used the binary criterion of sufﬁcient coverage employed by MuTect (Cibulskis et al., 2013), i.e. 14 high-quality reads/bases in the
tumor, 8 high-quality reads/bases in the matched normal. This allowed us to compute coverage-weighted context/effect territories
by weighting each ORF position yielding a given context/effect by the fraction of sufﬁciently covered samples at that position.
Furthermore, these exact transcript deﬁnitions are required for most conservatively estimating overall protein-coding effect distri-
butions (STAR Methods, calculating expected coding effect fractions), which requires accounting for loci in overlapping transcripts
that yield different protein-coding effects. We annotated mutations with the most deleterious effect across all transcripts at each po-
sition (synonymous < missense < nonsense) to avoid erroneously misclassifying mutations that are synonymous on one transcript but
protein-altering on a different overlapping transcript.
Deﬁnition of Known Cancer Genes
We assembled our list of Known Cancer Genes from the Cancer Gene Census (CGC) (v85) (Futreal et al., 2004), which comprises 719
genes. However, our KCG list is a subset of 133 genes, since not all genes listed in the CGC are relevant to this study, which only
considers somatic single nucleotide variants (sSNVs). The CGC indexes many genes driven by a variety of mechanisms outside
the scope of this study, such as genes only driven by structural variants (e.g., MYC), or genes that are only germline risk factors
(e.g., APOBEC3B). In addition, many genes in the CGC are only reported as drivers in tumor types not included in TCGA (e.g.,
many blood cancers). Finally, some CGC genes are only drivers in non-primary tumors (e.g., relapse or post-treatment resistance
tumors). We thus only considered genes explicitly listed in the CGC as drivers of primary tumors in the 32 tumor types in our cohort,
excluding genes driven only by structural variants.
QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Calculating Expected Coding Effect Fractions
Given a set of genes and their observed coding mutations, we wish to calculate the distribution of the expected fractions of protein-
coding effects (i.e., synonymous, missense, nonsense), assuming the mutations were distributed uniformly throughout the coding
sequences of these genes, conserving sequence context (in order to normalize for mutational processes).
For example, in the cartoon coding sequence, the three effects of all possible strand-collapsed T(C/T)G mutations (highlighted in
blue) are: (i) a synonymous substitution at codon 4 (Ile.4/Ile); (ii) a missense substitution at codon 7 (Arg.7/Gln, note mutation is on
the reverse complement strand, shown as hatching); and (iii) a nonsense substitution also at codon 7 (Arg.7/Stop).
Assuming every TCG in the cartoon sequence is equally mutable, we would therefore expect random T(C/T)G mutations to result
in an even distribution of coding effects — 1/3 synonymous, 1/3 missense, and 1/3 nonsense substitutions.
Cancer Cell 36, 288–301.e1–e14, September 16, 2019
e2

We can calculate the expected distribution of coding effects across a set of genes, if we assume that the variability of mutation
rates across genes is independent from the gene-speciﬁc tendency to generate synonymous, missense, or nonsense mutations.
Given a large enough set of genes, this assumption is reasonable.
For each trinucleotide context t, we calculate Ft(ejjci), the fraction of genomic positions that match t across the whole exome (or a
subset of genes, e.g., known cancer genes only) that would yield coding effect ej, given base change ci, where j˛{1,2,3} corresponds
to the three coding effects (synonymous/missense/nonsense), and i˛{1,2,3} corresponds to the three possible base substitutions.
We compute these fractions by enumerating the codon changes for every possible substitution at every coding position in our
gene set.
For a given set of observed coding mutations at context t within this gene set, we denote the fraction that are of the ith base change
as ft;ci. For example, if 95% of observed mutations at t = TCG are ci = C/T, then fTCG,C/T = 0.95.
For each of the three coding effects ej, the joint probability of seeing nt,eh{nt,e1,nt,e2,nt,e3} mutations given Nt total mutations within
context t is multinomial distributed
nt;e
Ft; ft; Nt  mult
0
B
B
@
X
i
Ftðe1jciÞft;ci
|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ}
pðe1jftÞ
;
X
i
Ftðe2jciÞft;ci;
X
i
Ftðe3jciÞft;ci; Nt
1
C
C
A:
However, because some trinucleotide contexts have low mutation counts for a given base change, there can be considerable
uncertainty on ft;ci. We quantify this uncertainty by modeling the f’s not as single values, but drawn from a distribution. The ideal
distribution for the f’s is a Dirichlet distribution, which quantiﬁes the uncertainty on multinomial probabilities derived from counts,
deﬁning the hierarchical model
nt;ejFt; ft; Nt  multðpðe1jftÞ; pðe2jftÞ; pðe3jftÞ; NtÞ
ftjnt;c  dir

nt;c1 + 1; nt;c2 + 1; nt;c3 + 1

:
We obtain the probability distribution on nt,e by marginalizing over ft, i.e.,
pðnt;e
nt;c; NtÞ
=
R
dftmult

nt;e1; nt;e2; nt;e3
pðe1jftÞ; pðe2jftÞ; pðe3jftÞ; Nt

3 dir

ft;c1; ft;c2; ft;c3
nt;c1 + 1; nt;c2 + 1; nt;c3 + 1

f
R dft
Y
3
j = 1
pðej
ftÞnt;ej
nt;ej!
Y
3
j = 1
f
nt;cj
t;cj
(Equation 1.1)
Since there is no closed form for this integral over the 2D Dirichlet simplex, we compute it by sampling the full joint distribution
p(nt,e,ftjnt,c,Nt) via Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC), and only considering the values drawn for nt,e. Our full conditionals are
pðnt;e
  Þ
f
Y
3
j = 1
pðej
ftÞnej
nej!
f
mult

nt;e1; nt;e2; nt;e3
pðe1jftÞ; pðe2jftÞ; pðe3jftÞ; Nt

pðftj  Þ
f
Y
3
j = 1
pðej
ftÞnt;ej Y
3
j = 1
f
nt;cj
t;cj
the ﬁrst of which we can sample from directly, the second of which cannot be analytically sampled from and requires Metropolis-
Hastings sampling.
To compute the overall expected fraction of coding effects for the set of observed mutations, we convolve over the count distri-
butions for the 32 strand-collapsed trinucleotides and 3 substitutions from (Equation 1.1),
ntot;e1; ntot;e2; ntot;e3  
32
t = 1

3
ci = 1 pðnt;e
nt;c; NtÞ
(Equation 1.2)
and then consider the fractions of each effect type (i.e., after dividing the counts by N = P
tNt) as the Dirichlet distribution
ftot;e1; ftot;e2; ftot;e3  dir

ntot;e1; ntot;e2; ntot;e3

:
Gene dN/dS Calculation
In the previous section, we computed the expected fractions of protein coding effects, given a set of mutations and their contexts/
substitutions. A related but distinct problem is computing whether the nonsynonymous mutation density signiﬁcantly exceeds the
e3
Cancer Cell 36, 288–301.e1–e14, September 16, 2019

synonymous mutation density for a given gene. This ratio-of-densities, referred to as dN / dS in molecular evolution, is a good proxy
for inferring whether a gene as a whole is under any kind of selective pressure:
d A gene under neutral selection will be mutated randomly and will have no bias towards generating nonsynonymous over
synonymous events, after normalizing for the gene sequence and codon structure. Therefore, the dN / dS of genes under
neutral selection will be very close to 1.
d A gene under positive selection will have an excess of nonsynonymous events, relative to synonymous events, since
phenotypes that change ﬁtness (positive or negative) arise overwhelmingly more often from protein altering mutations than
from synonymous mutations. Therefore, the dN / dS of genes under positive selection will exceed 1.
d A gene under negative selection will have a dearth of nonsynonymous events, since protein altering substitutions would be
selected out, keeping relatively more synonymous substitutions. Therefore, dN / dS of genes under negative selection will
be less than 1.
We are interested in identifying genes that are conﬁdently drivers (to deﬁne a true positive set) or genes that are conﬁdently
passengers (for a true negative set). As in the previous section, we are not simply interested in a point estimate of dN / dS for a
given gene, but rather its distribution. It is crucial to estimate the uncertainty on dN / dS to conﬁdently conclude whether
a gene is indeed under positive or neutral selection. Uncertainty in dN / dS decreases as the number of mutations in the gene
increases.
As mentioned previously, we must normalize for heterogeneous mutation frequencies at different genomic contexts and the codon
structure of the gene. For each of the 96 trinucleotide channels (16 contexts 3 6 base changes), the expected number of mutations
with coding effect e in gene g is simply
lg;e;ch

ng;e;c

= rcNg;e;c ;
where rc is the exome-wide mutation frequency for channel c and Ng,e,c is the number of positions (corrected for sequencing
coverage) in the ORF of g within channel c that would yield a codon substitution of a particular effect e (i.e., synonymous, missense,
nonsense).
If mutation frequencies were constant across all genes, then the observed number of mutations for channel c and effect e in any
gene would be Poisson distributed around this average, i.e.,
ng;e;c  pois

lg;e;c

:
(Equation 2.1)
We know this is not the case, as different genes have different background mutabilities, so the overall number of mutations could
be higher or lower than this expectation. Furthermore, driver genes are under positive selection, so their number of nonsynonymous
mutations could be higher than this expectation. We correct for this heterogeneity with a gene-speciﬁc scale factor we infer from
the data.
We assume background mutability/selective pressure is channel-independent — for example, we do not expect a more highly
mutable gene to be more mutable only with respect to T(C/T)G mutations, or a driver gene to be enriched for nonsynonymous
events preferentially for A(A/T)G mutations. Because of this channel-independence assumption, we scale lg,e,c by a channel-
agnostic correction factor bg,e, so the Poisson distribution in (Equation 2.1) becomes
ng;e;c  pois

bg;elg;e;c

:
(Equation 2.2)
bg,e reﬂects the overall excess/dearth of mutations with coding effect e in gene g. For example, bg,nonsyn close to 1 means that
the number of nonsynonymous mutations is close to what we expect given average mutation frequencies; values signiﬁcantly
higher than 1 indicate an excess of nonsynonymous events; values close to 0 indicate a paucity. Of course, bg,nonsyn[1 is not
necessarily indicative of positive selection — a highly mutable gene under neutral evolution would have a comparable excess of
both nonsynonymous and synonymous events. To infer selective pressure on gene g, we are interested in the ratio of these scale
factors,
dN = dShbg;nonsyn
bg;syn
:
We calculate bg,e from its likelihood, which is the product of (Equation 2.2) over the 96 channels,
L

bg;e

	
ng;e;ci; lg;e;ci

i˛f1.96g

=
Y
96
i = 1
pois

ng;e;ci; bg;elg;e;ci

f
Y
96
i = 1

bg;elg;e;ci
ng;e;ci exp

 bg;elg;e;ci

f
b
P
i
ng;e;ci
g;e
exp
 
 bg;e
X
i
lg;e;ci
!
:
Cancer Cell 36, 288–301.e1–e14, September 16, 2019
e4

For genes with many mutations, we could simply ﬁnd the maximum likelihood estimate of bg,e, as the likelihood would be sharply
peaked. However, since many genes have only a few mutations and have considerable uncertainty around the maximum likelihood
estimate (MLE), we use the full posterior on bg,e. Luckily, the Poisson likelihood is proportional to the gamma distribution, allowing us
to explicitly deﬁne this posterior:
p

bg;e; ng;e; lg;e

f
L

bg;e
ng;e; lg;e

f
b
P
i
ng;e;ci
g;e
exp
 
 bg;e
X
i
lg;e;ci
!
f
gamma
 
bg;e
1 +
X
i
ng;e;ci;
X
i
lg;e;ci
!
:
We can then treat both bg,nonsyn and bg,syn as gamma random variables, with the ratio dN/dS their quotient,
dN
dS  bg;nonsyn
bg;syn
bg;nonsyn

gamma

1 +
X
i
ng;nonsyn;ci;
X
i
lg;nonsyn;ci
!
bg;syn

gamma

1 +
X
i
ng;syn;ci;
X
i
lg;syn;ci
!
:
Finally, we obtain the distribution of dN / dS via a Monte Carlo simulation.
We can generalize this approach to infer the distribution of arbitrary protein-coding effect ratios — for example, whether genes are
enriched for truncating mutations relative to synonymous mutations, thereby increasing sensitivity to detect tumor suppressors,
which often harbor truncating events.
We list such genes in Table S3 (Prob[dT / dS > 2.5] > 0.975). As expected, the list almost entirely comprises well-known tumor
suppressors as per the Cancer Gene Census (CGC), or genes not yet indexed by the CGC but with evidence in the literature support-
ing their status as tumor suppressors, whose citations we have included in the table. While the list contains few totally uncharacter-
ized potential drivers, it is nonetheless conﬁrmation that the method we use to compute d* / dS works well.
Description of Signiﬁcance Methods
In this section, we detail the four models presented in the main text: the two conventional methods, Uniform-within-gene and
Uniform Poisson regression, which both assume that base-wise mutation frequencies have no latent variability beyond what
can be predicted by sequence context and genomic covariates, and the two overdispersed methods Gamma-Poisson regression
and Log-normal-Poisson regression, which allow mutation frequencies to have additional underlying variability beyond what the
covariates predict (modeled as gamma or log-normal distributions, respectively).
Uniform-within-Gene Model
The Uniform-within-gene model assumes that all sites of the same k-mer context in the same gene are equally mutable. There are
many methods that employ this conventional assumption, with varying implementations (Miller et al., 2015; Van den Eynden et al.,
2015; Lohr et al., 2012; Lawrence et al., 2014; Chang et al., 2016; Baeissa et al., 2017; Araya et al., 2016).
One particular method described by (Chang et al., 2016) assumes that the background mutation rate at a given position with trinu-
cleotide context t in gene g is proportional to the average exome-wide mutation rate across all contexts t, weighted by a gene- and
codon-speciﬁc mutability factor. In other words, it assumes that every context/codon combination t,c within gene g is equally
mutable. It also does not account for differing substitution rates, e.g., it considers all mutations at TCG contexts equally likely, irre-
spective of base change.
Because we consider mutations solely on the positional level, not on the codon level, we re-implemented a method similar to that of
Chang et al., which we call Uniform-within-gene, that does not include codon-speciﬁc factors, but does account for different sub-
stitution rates.
Let ns,c equal the total number of mutations with base substitution s at k-mer context c, and Nc equal the total number of contexts c
in the exome. The overall mutation rate for this context/substitution is
rs;c = ns;c

Nc :
(Equation 3.1)
If all genes were equally mutable, the expected number of mutations xs,c at any genomic position of context c with base substitution
s would simply be Poisson distributed (assuming binomial convergence) with rate parameter rs,c,
xs;c  poisðrs;cÞ:
(Equation 3.2)
The Uniform-within-gene model accounts for the fact that different genes have different intrinsic mutabilities by scaling rs,c by a
gene-speciﬁc mutability factor Fg, which explicitly assumes that all contexts/substitutions within the same gene are equally scaled.
Suppose the coding sequence of gene g contains Ng,c positions of context c. Assuming no gene-speciﬁc scaling, the expected
total number of mutations in g would be lg,s,c = rs,cNg,c, with rs,c from (Equation 3.1). The observed numbers of mutations xg,s,c for
e5
Cancer Cell 36, 288–301.e1–e14, September 16, 2019

this gene/context/substitution is again Poisson distributed around this average value, but this time scaled by an unknown
parameter Fg:
xg;s;c  pois

lg;s;cFg

:
To calculate Fg, we ﬁrst compute its likelihood over all 4k/2 strand-collapsed contexts33 substitutions (equals to 96 for k = 3),
L

Fg
	
xi;j


=
Y
i = 1
4k=2 Y
j = 1
3
pois

xi;j
lg;i;jFg

:
Next, we ﬁnd the maximum likelihood estimate for Fg,
bF g =
P
i;jxg;i;j
P
i;jlg;i;j
:
(Equation 3.3)
Scaling the rate parameter of (Equations C.3.2) by (C.3.3), we can compute a p value (i.e., the probability of seeing at least the
observed number of mutations by chance) for a particular gene, site, and substitution type by plugging in the observed number of
mutations, ~xg;c;s, into the upper cumulative distribution function (CDF) of the Poisson distribution
P
~xg;c;s

h Pr

xRxg;c;s

=
X
N
x = ~xg;c;s
pois

x
rs;c bF g

:
Uniform Poisson Regression Model
Rather than estimate the background mutability of a gene from its own mutation burden as in the Uniform-within-gene model, we can
estimate it by regressing against covariates known to inﬂuence background mutability. Because covariates can be associated with
genomic regions of different scales (e.g., from the single base-pair to entire chromatin regions), this approach is not limited to learning
mutability solely on the gene scale, as is the case with the Uniform-within-gene model, but rather allows pooling information from
genomic regions of arbitrary scales.
We implement this model via standard Poisson regression, i.e., a ﬁxed effect general linear model (GLM) with a log link function. For
a given genomic position i mutated xi,k times across the cohort with context and substitution k and covariate vector c!
i, we assume
the observed mutation count is Poisson distributed, with the log of its rate parameter linearly deﬁned by the covariates, i.e.,
xi;k
 c!
i  poisðli;kÞ
logli;k = bk0 + b!
k, c!
i:
(Equation 3.4)
To ﬁnd the intercept bk0 and slope b!
k parameters, we maximize their likelihood function with respect to all exonic positions of
context and substitution k, whose set we denote Ek:
Lðbk0; b!
k
	
xi;k

; c!Þ =
Y
i˛Ek
poisðxi;k
expðbk0 + b!
k, c!
iÞÞ:
This likelihood function is log-convex so its maximum bbk0; cb!
k can be found via simple optimization methods, e.g., gradient
descent. In practice, we use Newton-Raphson because the number of parameters is low enough that computing their full Hessian
(O(n2) in number of parameters) is feasible.
Once we have found our model parameters for each k, we can assign a p value for any position with context and substitution k with
counts ~xi;k and speciﬁc covariates fc!
i from the upper CDF of the Poisson distribution, as before:
P
~xi;k
fc!
i

h Pr

xR~xi;k
fc!
i

=
X
N
x = ~xi;k
pois

x
exp
bbk0 + cb!
k,fc!
i

:
Gamma-Poisson Regression Model
The previous two models both assume that the base-wise mutability (i.e., the Poisson distribution’s rate parameter) is ﬁxed once the
model parameters are found. However, this assumption does not allow for additional uncertainty in the base-wise mutability. To allow
for additional uncertainty, we can probabilistically model the base-wise mutability using an arbitrary distribution p(q). This forms a
hierarchical model for observed mutation counts x,
x  poisðlÞ
l  pðqÞ
whose probability density function (PDF) is the compound distribution
pðxjqÞ =
Z N
0
dl poisðxjlÞpðljqÞ;
(Equation 3.5)
with the parameters q of the latent distribution of the base-wise mutability learned from the data, e.g., using maximum likelihood.
Cancer Cell 36, 288–301.e1–e14, September 16, 2019
e6

Unfortunately, the integral in (Equation 3.5) is only analytically tractable for a few choices of pðljqÞ. One common choice is the
gamma distribution; as mentioned in the main text, there is no intrinsic biological motivation for using this distribution — it is merely
mathematically convenient. If p(l | q) h gamma(l | a,b), (Equation 3.5) becomes
pðxja; bÞ
=
Z N
0
dl poisðxjlÞgammaðlja; bÞ
=
1
x!
ba
GðaÞ
Z N
0
dl expð  lÞlx 3 expð  l=bÞla1:
(Equation 3.6)
This integral is of the form
R N
0 dx expð  axÞxb1 = abGðbÞ, so (Equation 3.6) becomes
pðxja; bÞ
=
1
x!
ba
GðaÞ
 b
1 + b
x + a b
1 + b
a
Gða + xÞ
Z
pðxja; pÞ
=
Gða + xÞ
Gðx + 1ÞGðaÞpxð1  pÞa;
the PDF of the negative binomial distribution for p = b/(1 + b). Unlike the Poisson distribution, which is immediately amenable to
parameterization as a GLM whose log mean can be linearly parameterized by covariates (Equation 3.4), the negative binomial
must be re-written in terms of its mean, m = pa/(1p), yielding the GLM
p

xi;k
a; b0; b!; c!
i

f
 mi
a + mi
xi;k
a
a + mi
a
logmi;k = bk0 + b!
k, c!
i:
As before, optimal values for model parameters (intercept bk0, slope vector b!
k, and dispersion parameter a) can be found via
maximum likelihood estimation. Finally, we assign p values as with the other methods by computing the upper CDF of the negative
binomial distribution parameterized by its MLE values.
Log-Normal-Poisson Regression Model
A more principled choice for the latent distribution for the base-wise mutability is the log-normal distribution. Mutations are the prod-
uct of independent consecutive events, each with an independent probability of occurring; by the geometric central limit theorem,
this product of probabilities approaches a log-normal distribution (Sutton, 1997).
As in the Uniform Poisson regression model (Equation 3.4), the covariates linearly determine the log of the Poisson rate, but this
time we include an additional linear factor ei,k, which is a random variable that represents additional latent mutation rate variability at
position i (with context and substitution k) not explained by the covariates. For genomic position i mutated xi times with covariate
vector c!
i in channel k, our model is
xi;k
 c!
i  poisðli;kÞ
logli;k = b!
k, c!
i + mk + skei;k
ei;k  N ð0; 1Þ:
The PDF of xi,k is then
pðxi;k
mk; sk; b!
k; c!
iÞ =
Z N
0
dei;k poisðxi;k
expð b!
k, c!
i + mk + skei;kÞÞN ðei;k
0; 1Þ:
(Equation 3.7)
Sinceei,k is a standard normal random variable, expð b!
k, c!
i + mk + skei;kÞ is log-normally distributedwithgeometric mean b!
k , c!
i + mk
andgeometricstandarddeviationsk. These parameters areinterpretable: mk represents the overall geometricmean mutation frequency
forcontext/substitution k, sktheoverall geometricstandarddeviation aroundthis mean (i.e.,theaveragemultiplicativedistancefromthe
mean), and b!
k the geometric covariate slope vector associated with k (i.e., the multiplicative effect each covariate has on the muta-
tion rate).
In addition to being better statistically calibrated than the other methods (see Results), the log-normal-Poisson model carries other
advantages:
1. Because sk is multiplicative, it quantiﬁes overdispersion irrespective of mutation frequency, allowing for comparisons
between different mutational processes. For example, exp(sk) = 2 indicates that bases in context-substitution pair k that are
one geometric standard deviation above the mean will be approximately twice as mutable as sites at the mean, while bases
falling one g. standard deviation below the mean will be approximately half as mutable, regardless of the mean mutation fre-
quency.
2. The log-normal-Poisson model accommodates nested variance (variance is additive). Suppose that we are analyzing muta-
tions within trinucleotide context c. We would ﬁt the model to all exonic sites of that sequence context. Now suppose that
we would like to account for additional variance explained by the 16 ﬂanking pentanucleotide contexts. The set of base-pairs
belonging to the trinucleotide context c is a superset of the base-pairs belonging to a pentamer context ﬂanking that
e7
Cancer Cell 36, 288–301.e1–e14, September 16, 2019

trinucleotide. Thus, we can express the total variance for base-pair i at context/substitution k as the sum of the overall trinu-
cleotide variance and the additional variance explained by the pentamer context of i:
logli;k = b!
k, c!
i + mkpent + sktrieitri + skpenteipent;
(Equation 3.8)
with eitri and eipent representing independent standard normal random variables. The total variance for the pentamer context is
s2
ktri + s2
kpent, since the variance of the sum of independent normal random variables is the sum of their variances. In general linear
mixed model parlance, the pentamers are categorical random effects.
3. The natural parameterization in terms of mean and variance allows us to naturally quantify the amount of variance explained by
model factors (e.g., covariates). The amount that s2 drops after adding a covariate is equivalent to the variance explained
by that covariate, given the other covariates already present in the model. To obtain the average linear contribution of each
covariate, we ﬁt the model for all possible sets of covariates, and then perform an ordinary least squares ﬁt to ﬁnd each mar-
ginal linear contribution. For example, if there are three covariates, we ﬁt a model for each of the 23 = 8 possible combinations,
obtaining s2
0.s2
7, the observed values of model parameter s2 for each covariate set (0: no covariates, 7: all covariates). We then
ﬁt the following linear model,
2
666666664
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
1
«
«
«
«
1
1
1
1
3
777777775
s!2
lin =
2
666666664
s2
0
s2
1
s2
2
s2
3
«
s2
7
3
777777775
;
witha1inthedatamatrixrepresentingthepresenceofeachcovariate.Theﬁrstcolumnistheinterceptandthusentirelycomprisesones.
s!2
lin is then the marginal linear contribution of each covariate; its ﬁrst element (i.e., the intercept) is the remaining amount of unexplained
variance after all covariates have been incorporated; the other three elements are the variance explained by their respective covariate.
To ﬁt the log-normal-Poisson model’s parameters, we employ a fully Bayesian approach, sampling from the parameters’ posterior
distribution pðmk; sk; b!
k
fxi;kg; f c!gÞ via MCMC. We use MCMC instead of a standard likelihood (or quasi-likelihood) approach
because:
1. The model parameters provide meaningful summary statistics of the base-wise mutation rate; as such, we are not merely inter-
ested in the model’s predictions (i.e., signiﬁcance values), but also its parameters. It is therefore useful to not only obtain their
optimal best-ﬁt values, but their overall posterior distribution, to quantify our conﬁdence in the model.
2. The integral in (Equation 3.7) is analytically intractable, but it is amenable to approximation via Gibbs sampling, given the hi-
erarchical nature of the model.
We describe the MCMC in detail in STAR Methods, MCMC implementation.
To compute p values for the previous three models, we ﬁrst ﬁnd a point estimate bq of optimal model parameters (e.g., via maximum
likelihood estimation), and then use the upper CDF parameterized by bq, for an observed number of mutations ~xi with covariates fc!
i at
base-pair i,
P
~xi
fc!
i

=
X
N
x = ~xi
p

x
bq; fc!
i

:
Because the log-normal-Poisson model is fully Bayesian, we no longer use a point estimate for bq, but rather integrate the CDF over
the full domain Q of the posterior on q, yielding posterior predictive p values
P

~xi

~c!
i

=
X
N
x = ~xi
Z
Q
dq p

x
q; ~c!
i

pðqjfxg; f c!g Þ
(Equation 3.9)
MCMC Implementation
In this section, we detail the implementation of the Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) sampler used to ﬁt the log-normal-Poisson
regression model. As with most non-conjugate hierarchical models, the log-normal-Poisson probability density function (Equa-
tion 3.7) is analytically intractable — its most general form is the compound distribution
pðxjm; sÞ =
Z N
0
de poisðxjeÞlogN ðejm; sÞ;
(Equation 4.1)
Cancer Cell 36, 288–301.e1–e14, September 16, 2019
e8

which has no closed form, so analytically sampling any distribution derived from the log-normal-Poisson PDF (e.g., the posterior on
model parameters) will also lack closed form.
Model Statement
Recall the model hierarchy of the general linear mixed model deﬁned in Equations 3.7 and 3.8 in Log-Normal-Poisson Regres-
sion Model.
For observed number of mutated patients xi at the ith base-pair whose covariate vector is c!
i, we have
xij c!
i  poisðliÞ
logli = b!, c!
i + m + sei
ei  N ð0; 1Þ:
For a set {x} of n base-pairs with covariates f c!g, the full posterior distribution across all parameters — i.e., including the latent e in
(Equation 4.1) or (Equation 3.7) — is
pðm; s; b!; e1; .; enjfxg; f c!g; HÞf
Y
i = 1
n
½pðxijexpð b!, c!
i + m + seiÞÞpðeiÞpðm; s; b!jHÞ
(Equation 4.2)
for set of hyperparameters H. In the case of nested variability (i.e., when adding m total categorical random effects), the model
hierarchy becomes
xi
 c!
i; 1i,  poisðliÞ
logli = b!, c!
i +
X
j = 1
m
ðmj + sjeijÞ1ij + s0ei0
	
eij

 N ð0; 1Þ;
(Equation 4.3)
where 1ij is an indicator function for whether the ith base is of category j, and the set {eij} comprises independent standard normal
random variables. The full posterior (Equation 4.2) becomes
pðm1; .; mm; s0; s1; .; sm; b!; fegjfxg; f c!g; H Þ
f
Y
n
i = 1
"
p
 
xi
exp
 
b!, c!
i +
Xm
j = 1ðmj + sjeijÞ1ij + s0ei0
! !
pðei0Þ
Y
m
j = 1
pðeijÞ1ij
#
pðfmg; fsg; b!jH Þ
(Equation 4.4)
In our analyses, we only use the categorical random effects to represent ﬂanking pentamer contexts within each trimer. Suppose
that we ﬁt the model to the set of all base-pair substitutions {xk} at trinucleotide substitution k, e.g. TCT/TAT. Our categories within
fxkg are the j = 1 . 16 pentamer contexts ﬂanking k (e.g., ATCTG), which are unique for each base-pair. Then (Equations C.4.3)
becomes (C.3.8); the sum in (C.4.3) disappears, since 1ij = 0 for all but a single value of j — each base-pair can only have a single
pentamer context. We denote the pentamer context associated with the ith base-pair as j(i).
Explicitly writing out the full posterior distribution for the single random effect model for n base-pairs in trinucleotide context k, we have
pðm1; .; m16; s0; s1; .; s16; b!; fegjfxkg; f c!g; HÞ
f
Y
n
i = 1
"
p
 
xi
exp
 
b!, c!
i + mjðiÞ + s0ei0 + sjðiÞeijðiÞ
|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ}
li
!!
pðei0Þp

eijðiÞ

#
pðfmg; fsg; b!jHÞ
(Equation 4.5)
By sampling from the full posterior in (Equations 4.5) and ignoring the samples for latent parameters e, we simultaneously sample
the distribution on the parameters of interest ({m}, {s}, b!) while marginalizing out feg, i.e., performing the integral in (Equations 4.1).
Because these full posteriors can have millions of parameters (each eij˛{e} corresponds to a single base-pair, and we ﬁt the model to
all base-pairs within a trinucleotide context), they are impractical to sample in a single draw. We therefore use a Metropolis-within-
Gibbs scheme: we partition the joint posterior’s parameters into uncorrelated blocks, and independently sample from the full
conditional of each block. In the next sections, we detail these parameter blocks and their full conditionals. We will focus exclusively
on the nested model in (Equations 4.5), since the non-nested model is a simpliﬁed subset of it.
Metropolis-within-Gibbs Description
The Gibbs sampler allows us to draw from a high dimensional probability distribution by iteratively sampling lower dimensional sub-
sets of its parameters conditioned on all the other parameters. For example, if sampling in three dimensions from the distribution
pðx; y; zÞ is difﬁcult, iterative univariate samples from full conditional distributions p(xjy,z), p(yjx,z), and p(zjx,y) will converge to multi-
variate samples (x,y,z) from the full joint. We will denote full conditional distributions as p(x|): x conditioned on all other parameters in
the joint, i.e., (y, z).
For notational convenience, let us ﬁrst expand (Equations C.4.5) in terms of the PDFs of the Poisson and standard normal distributions
corresponding to p(xijli) and p(eij), respectively. Recall that li is a function of mj(i), s0, sj(i), b!, {e}, and c!
i; we omit the arguments for brevity.
e9
Cancer Cell 36, 288–301.e1–e14, September 16, 2019

pðfmg; fsg; b!; fegjfxkg; f c!g; H Þf
Y
n
i = 1
"
expðlixi  expðliÞ Þexp

 e2
i0
2

exp
 

e2
ijðiÞ
2
! #
3 pðfmg; fsg; b!jH Þ
(Equation 4.6)
We see that the e’s are independent, so each eij can be sampled independently as its own 1-dimensional block. To allow for cor-
relation between each mj and each sj, we sample (mj, sj) as a 2-D block. Likewise, if there is correlation between covariates, we will
expect correlation between elements of b!˛Rb, and will therefore sample b! as a b-dimensional block.
Because none of the full conditionals can be sampled from analytically, we will sample from them using the Metropolis-Hastings
algorithm: given some target distribution p(x) that is impossible to analytically sample from, we randomly sample x* from some easy-
to-sample proposal distribution q(x*jx) that approximates p(x), and accept the new value x* with probability
Prðx/xÞ = min

1; pðxÞqðxjxÞ
pðxÞqðxjxÞ

:
Iterating this procedure will yield random samples from target p(x).
Of course, performance of this method critically depends on choosing a proposal distribution that well-approximates the distribu-
tion being sampled. All of the full conditionals are log-concave; furthermore, terms above second-order in their series expansions
around their maxima are negligible, so we will use proposal distributions that quadratically approximate the full conditionals centered
at their maxima. We ﬁnd each full conditional’s global maximum, and propose using a (multivariate) t distribution whose mean is the
global maximum and whose (co)variance is the curvature at the maximum,
c
m!^= hbx; byi = argmax
x;y
ðlogpðx; yj  Þ Þ
bS =  H1½logpðbx; byj  Þ 
qðx; yjx; yÞ  tn

c
m!^; bS

;
where H1 is the inverse Hessian. n is the degrees-of-freedom of the t distribution, which can be tuned to achieve better approxima-
tion of the target distribution.
To ﬁnd the maxima, we use Newton-Raphson iterations (since we are already calculating the Hessian), augmented with backtrack-
ing linesearch to avoid potentially overshooting.
Metropolis-within-Gibbs Sampling Blocks
Here, we detail the sampling procedure used for each full conditional block.
mj, sj block The full conditional of each (mj,sj) block is
log pðmj; sj
  Þf
X
i˛J

ðmj + sjeijÞxi  exp

b!, c!
i + mj + s0ei0 + sjeij
 
+ logpðmj; sj
HÞ:
Until this point, we have not speciﬁed the form of our priors. Because
X  mj + sjN ð0; 1ÞhX  N

mj; s2
j

;
it makes sense to specify a joint prior pðmj; sj
HÞ on (mj,sj) conjugate to the normal distribution, to make interpretation of hyperpara-
meters H easy. In this case, this is the normal-inverse-gamma distribution:
mj; s2
j  N G1ðA; B; M; SÞ:
(Equation 4.7)
where A and B are the shape/scale parameters of the gamma distribution, and M and S are the mean/variance parameters of the
normal distribution, respectively. These parameters signify that s2
j was estimated from 2A observations with sample mean M and
sum of sample squared deviations 2B; mj was estimated from S observations with sample mean M. To actually implement this prior,
we make change-of-variable tj = 1=s2
j , turning the normal-inverse-gamma prior into a normal-gamma prior
mj; tj  N GðA; B; M; SÞ:
With our prior in hand, we need to compute the gradient and Hessian of the full conditional in order to perform our Newton-Raphson
iterations. Our gradient is
Cancer Cell 36, 288–301.e1–e14, September 16, 2019
e10

V
!logpðmj; tj
  Þ
=
 v
vmj
logpðmj; tj
  Þ; v
vtj
logpðmj; tj
  Þ

v
vmj
logpðmj; tj
  Þ =
X
i˛J
xi  expðmjÞ
X
i˛J
exp

b!$ c!
i + ei0ﬃﬃﬃﬃ
t0
p
+ eijﬃﬃﬃtj
p

Stjðmj  MÞ
|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ}
v
vmj
logNGðmj; tj
A; B; M; SÞ
v
vtj
logpðmj; tj
  Þ = 
1
2t3=2
j
X
i˛J
eijxi
+ expðmjÞ
X
i˛J
exp

b!$ c!
i + ei0ﬃﬃﬃﬃ
t0
p
+ eijﬃﬃﬃtj
p

eij
2t3=2
j
+ A  1
tj
 1
B  S
2ðmj  MÞ2 + 1
2tj
|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ}
v
vtj
logNG
;
and our Hessian components are
Hm;m
=
expðmjÞ
X
i˛J
exp

b!$ c!
i + ei0ﬃﬃﬃﬃ
t0
p
+ eijﬃﬃﬃtj
p

St
|ﬄ{zﬄ}
v2
vm2
j
logNG
Ht;t
=
3
4t5=2
j
X
i˛J
eijxi + expðmjÞ
X
i˛J
exp

b!$ c!
i + ei0ﬃﬃﬃﬃ
t0
p
+ eijﬃﬃﬃtj
p

eij
"

3
4t5=2
j
 eij
4t3
j
#
2A  1
2t2
j
|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ}
v2
vt2
j
logNG
Hm;t
= expðmjÞ
X
i˛J
exp

b!$ c!
i + ei0ﬃﬃﬃﬃ
t0
p
+ eijﬃﬃﬃtj
p

eij
2t3=2
j
Tðmj  MÞ
|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ}
v2
vmjvtj
logNG
To actually use this gradient/Hessian to perform Newton-Raphson iterations, and since Newton-Raphson updates are only stable
on functions whose domain is R, we need to make change-of-variable g1 : R + /R; tj1logðtjÞ, because tj˛(0,N). Recall that when
transforming parameters of a probability distribution with some function g1, we need to multiply by the Jacobian of the inverse trans-
form g to preserve the volume element. Thus, for g1(tj) = log(tj),
pðmj; gðtjÞ
  Þ dg
dtj
= pðmj; expðtjÞ
  ÞexpðtjÞ:
As a result, our log-space gradient/Hessian are actually
V
!½logpðmj; expðtjÞ
  Þ + tj
H½logpðmj; expðtjÞ
  Þ + tj 
Performing this change-of-variables requires invoking the chain rule. For the gradient, this is straightforward:
V
!fðx; gðyÞÞ =
vf
vx; vf
vg
vg
vy

;
so for g(y) = exp(y), we simply multiply the untransformed t component of the gradient ðvgfÞ by exp(tj), and then add 1 to account for
the Jacobian. For the Hessian, we need to invoke the chain rule twice, to account for the second derivative. Hxx is unchanged. The
other components transform as follows:
e11
Cancer Cell 36, 288–301.e1–e14, September 16, 2019

Hyy
=
v
vy
vf
vg
vg
vy

=
vf
vg
v2g
vy2 +
vg
vy
2 v2f
vg2
Hxy
=
v
vy
vf
vx

=
vg
vy
v2f
vgvx
vgf is the untransformed t component of the gradient; v2
yg = expðtjÞ; ðvygÞ2 = expð2tjÞ; v2
gf is the untransformed ðt; tÞ component of
the Hessian; and v2
gxf is the untransformed m; t component of the Hessian. Because the Jacobian term in the gradient is a constant 1,
it disappears entirely in the Hessian.
s0 block In addition to each (mj,sj) for each pentamer context, we also have an overall variance term s0 shared between the pen-
tamers. Its full conditional is
logpðs0j  Þf
X
n
i = 1

s0ei0xi  exp

b!, c!
i + mjðiÞ + s0ei0 + sjðiÞeijðiÞ
 
+ logpðs0jHÞ:
We place an inverse gamma prior on s2
0  G1ðA;BÞ, whose parameters have the same conjugate interpretation as the normal-in-
verse-gamma prior for (mj,sj), (Equation 4.7). As before, we perform change-of-variable t0 = 1=s2
0 to actually implement this model
structure. Our gradient and Hessian are simply the ﬁrst and second derivatives of p(s0|):
v
vt0
logpðt0j  Þ
=
 1
2t3=2
0
X
n
i = 1
ei0xi
+ P
n
i = 1
exp

b!$ c!
i + mjðiÞ + ei0ﬃﬃﬃﬃ
t0
p
+ eijðiÞ
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
tjðiÞ
p
 ei0
2t3=2
0
+
A  1
t0
 1
B
|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ}
v
vt0
logGðA; BÞ
and
v2
vt2
0
logpðt0j  Þ
=
3
4t5=2
0
X
n
i = 1
ei0xi
+ P
n
i = 1
exp

b!$ c!
i + mjðiÞ + ei0ﬃﬃﬃﬃ
t0
p
+ eijðiÞ
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
tjðiÞ
p

ei0
"

3
4t5=2
0
 ei0
4t3
0
#
A  1
t2
0
|ﬄﬄﬄﬄ{zﬄﬄﬄﬄ}
v2
vt2
0
logGðA; BÞ
:
As before, we actually perform the Newton-Raphson iterations on log p(exp(t0)|), transforming the PDF and ﬁrst/second deriv-
atives with the appropriate Jacobian and chain rule factors, respectively.
b! block Our full conditional is
logpð b!j  Þf
X
n
i = 1

b!, c!
ixi + exp

b!, c!
i + mjðiÞ + s0ei0 + sjðiÞeijðiÞ
 
+ logpð b!jHÞ;
with pð b!jHÞ equal to multivariate normal prior b!  N mð m!
b;SbÞ. For both notational convenience and computational efﬁciency, we
express the sums of dot products (i.e., P
i
b!, c!
i) as matrix multiplications over covariate matrix C =

c!
1
/
c!
n
u
and data vector
x! = hx1; .xniu. We similarly vectorize our sets of parameters and latent random variables, with parameter vectors s!
J =
hsjð1Þ; sjð2Þ; .; sjðnÞiu
and
m!
J =
hmjð1Þ; .; mjðnÞiu,
and
latent
random
variable
vectors
e!
0 = he10; e20; .; en0iu
and
e!
J =
he1jð1Þ; .; enjðnÞiu. Our gradient is
V
!pð b!jÞ = x!uC  exp1ðC b!+ m!
J + s0 e!
0 + s!
J, e!
JÞu
|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ}
q!
CS1
b ð b!  m!
bÞ
|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ}
V
!
pð b!
j m!
b;SbÞ
;
where exp1 is the elementwise exponential. Our Hessian is simply
H =  Cudiagð q!ÞC  S1
b :
Because C can have millions of rows, we speed up calculation of the Hessian by noting that any matrix multiplication of the form
CuDC with diagonal D can be expressed as
Cancer Cell 36, 288–301.e1–e14, September 16, 2019
e12

CuDC = Cu
 X
j = 1
n
djEjj
!
C =
X
n
j = 1
djCuEjjC =
X
n
j = 1
dj c!
j5 c!
j
where dj is the jth diagonal element of D, Ejj the corresponding standard basis matrix, and c!
j the jth row of C. Because the covariate
matrix C is constant, we only need to calculate each outer product c!
j5 c!
j once ahead of time, greatly saving time when computing
the Hessian, which only requires computing a linear combination of the outer product matrices.
e blocks For each shared latent random variable ei0˛e0, our full conditional is
logpðei0jÞ f s0ei0xi  exp

b!, c!
i + mjðiÞ + s0ei0 + sjðiÞeijðiÞ

 e2
i0
2 :
Likewise, each nested latent random variable’s full conditional is
logp

eijðiÞ
 

f sjeijðiÞxi  exp

b!, c!
i + mjðiÞ + s0ei0 + sjðiÞeijðiÞ


e2
ijðjÞ
2 :
Each of these full conditionals is univariate, so their gradients/Hessians will simply be the ﬁrst/second derivatives, which are of
the form
v
vei0
logpðei0j  Þ
=
s0xi  s0exp

b!$ c!
i + mjðiÞ + s0ei0 + sjðiÞeijðiÞ

 ei0
v2
ve2
i0
logpðei0j  Þ
=
 s2
0exp

b!$ c!
i + mjðiÞ + s0ei0 + sjðiÞeijðiÞ

 1;
substituting the appropriate s/e as necessary.
Posterior Predictive Calculation
To actually infer whether an observed level of recurrent mutation signiﬁcantly exceeds the expected background, we compute a pos-
terior predictive p value as stated in Equation 3.9. This entails integrating the parameters of the log-normal-Poisson distribution over
the posterior probabilities of the model parameters, whose domain we denote Q. Given some observed number of mutations ~x with
covariates fc! and category (i.e., pentamer context) , the posterior predictive is
To compute the outer integral over model parameters, we simply average draws from the MCMC:
where (i) is the ith MCMC draw.
To compute the inner integrals over latent parameters, we use Hermite quadrature. Hermite polynomials provide a basis for
approximating integrals of the form R N
N dx fðxÞexpð  x2Þ. In our case, the inner integrand is
omitting normalizing constants for brevity. We can transform this into a function of a single variable by noting that the sum of normal
random variables e0 and is equivalent to the single normal random variable
. Our integrand becomes
which is of the form f (x) exp (x2) after change-of-variable x = e=
ﬃﬃﬃ
2
p
, and therefore amenable to approximation via Hermite
quadrature,
e13
Cancer Cell 36, 288–301.e1–e14, September 16, 2019

Z N
N
de fðeÞexp

e2
2

=
ﬃﬃﬃ
2
p Z N
N
dx fðxÞexp

x2
z
ﬃﬃﬃ
2
p X
n
i = 1
wifðxiÞ;
where xi is the ith root of Hermite polynomial Hn, and wi is the ith Hermite quadrature weight. Note the additional factor of
ﬃﬃﬃ
2
p
from
transforming the volume element de.
DATA AND CODE AVAILABILITY
Code for running the MCMC to sample the Log-normal-Poisson model posterior and compute signiﬁcance values is available at
https://github.com/broadinstitute/getzlab-LNP. Code for reproducing the manuscript ﬁgures and analyses is available at https://
github.com/broadinstitute/getzlab-PHS.
Cancer Cell 36, 288–301.e1–e14, September 16, 2019
e14

Cancer Cell, Volume 36
Supplemental Information
Passenger Hotspot Mutations in Cancer
Julian M. Hess, Andre Bernards, Jaegil Kim, Mendy Miller, Amaro Taylor-Weiner, Nicholas
J. Haradhvala, Michael S. Lawrence, and Gad Getz

A>C
A>G
A>T
C>A
C>G
C>T
A_A
A_G
A_C
A_G
A_T
C_A
C_C
C_G
C_T
G_A
G_C
G_G
G_T
T_C
T_T
C_G
A_A
A_C
A_T
C_A
C_C
C_G
C_T
G_A
G_C
G_T
T_A
T_C
T_T
T_A
T_C
T_T
A_A
A_C
A_G
A_T
C_A
C_C
C_G
C_T
G_A
G_C
G_G
G_T
T_A
T_C
T_G
T_T
Figure S1: Expected protein-coding effects for each of the 96 trinucleotide substitutions; related to Figure 1. Width of each bar is pro-
portional to observed mutation burden in our cohort for that substitution. Note that A(A→[CT])T and A(C→[AG])T substitutions can never
generate synonymous (gray) mutations, and [CG](C→G)[ACG]/T(C→G)[CG]/[ACGT](C→T)T substitutions can never generate nonsense
(red) mutations.

Minimum q value in gene significant 
by at least one method
Minimum q value in gene not 
significant by any method
Confident false positive gene
q ≤ 0.1 significance cutoff
Confident true positive gene
1
10 -1
10 -2
10 -3
10 -4
10 -5
10 -6
10 -7
≤10 -8
Log-normal-Poisson
1
10 -1 10 -2 10 -3 10 -4 10 -5 10 -6 10 -7
≤10 -8
1
10 -1
10 -2
10 -3
10 -4
10 -5
10 -6
10 -7
≤10 -8
Gamma-Poisson
1
10 -1 10 -2 10 -3 10 -4 10 -5 10 -6 10 -7
≤10 -8
Uniform-within-gene
1
10 -1
10 -2
10 -3
10 -4
10 -5
10 -6
10 -7
≤10 -8
Uniform Poisson
1
10 -1 10 -2 10 -3 10 -4 10 -5 10 -6 10 -7
≤10 -8
1
10 -1
10 -2
10 -3
10 -4
10 -5
10 -6
10 -7
≤10 -8
1
10 -1 10 -2 10 -3 10 -4 10 -5 10 -6 10 -7
≤10 -8
Uniform Poisson
1
10 -1
10 -2
10 -3
10 -4
10 -5
10 -6
10 -7
≤10 -8
1
10 -1 10 -2 10 -3 10 -4 10 -5 10 -6 10 -7
≤10 -8
Gamma-Poisson
1
10 -1
10 -2
10 -3
10 -4
10 -5
10 -6
10 -7
≤10 -8
A
C
B
10 -2
10 -1
10 0
False Positive Rate
0.6
0.65
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.85
0.9
0.95
1
True Positive Rate
10 -2
10 -1
10 -2
10 -1
10 -2
10 -1
10 -1
10 -2
Log-normal-Poisson
Gamma-Poisson
Uniform Poisson
Uniform-within-gene
Uniform theoretical p value quantiles
Observed p value quantiles
Figure S2: Comparison of methods’ statistical calibration; related to Figure 2. (A) Cross-method comparison of minimum q values across
all mutations in each gene. Genes in false-positive/true-positive truth sets are circled in red and green, respectively. q value cutoff of 0.1
shown as dashed lines. For clarity, points at q = 1 or q < 10−8 are randomly jittered. Comparison of Log-normal-Poisson method against
other methods highlighted in gray. (B) Alternate version of Figure 2A showing ROC curves with positive truth set comprising genes with
recurrent mutations whose oncogenic roles are supported by the literature. Negative truth set comprises genes conﬁdently under neutral
selection, as before. (C) Quantile-Quantile (QQ) plots of each method’s p values. Dashed 1:1 line corresponds to uniformly distributed
p values; gray area represents region of Benjamini-Hochberg q value < 0.1. For legibility purposes, observed p values are capped at a
minimum value of 10−16.

Q61/Q72 GTP hydrolysis site
H/K/NRAS G12/13 activating sites
Switch-II motif
PKN binding 
domain
Putative acyl-CoA 
synthetase domain
WT
S146L
0
2
10
20
30
40
50
60
MYC absolute copy number
E1033D
WT
1   
10  
100 
1000
3000
Total number of indels
A
B
C
D
E
H/K/NRAS coordinates
RRAS2 coordinates
HRAS
KRAS
NRAS
RRAS2
RAC1
RHOA
RHOB
RHOC
SLC27A1
SLC27A2
SLC27A3
SLC27A4
SLC27A5
SLC27A6
Figure S3: Functional exposition of putative driver hotspots; related to Figure 4. In all sequence alignment plots, amino acids with
orange letters are mutated; amino acids with black backgrounds are signiﬁcant hotspots (by the Log-normal-Poisson model). Other colors
represent the number of matching amino acids across the alignment. (A) Sequence alignment of ﬁrst 68 amino acids of canonical Ras
subfamily members H/K/NRAS and ﬁrst 79 amino acids of RRAS2, with both H/K/NRAS and RRAS2 coordinates shown to emphasize
homology between hydrolysis site Q61 (and well-known driver locus) of canonical subfamily members with Q72 in RRAS2. (B) Sequence
alignments of three subsections of Rho GTPase subfamily members RAC1 and RHOA/B/C. The ﬁrst subsection comprises amino acids
1-16, in order to showcase similarity of N termini. The next subsection contains the highly conserved Switch-II motif, which contains
a signiﬁcant hotspot in RHOB and has high mutation burden across the four Rho GTPase subfamily members. The third subsection
contains the PKN-binding domain, which also contains a signiﬁcant hotspot in RHOB. (C) Sequence alignment of solute carrier 27 family
members, illustrating signiﬁcant hotspot in SLC27A5 occurring in highly conserved motif (putative acyl-CoA synthetase domain) within a
larger nonconserved context. (D) Absolute copy number at MYC of all wildtype patients versus S146L mutants. Red crosses show allelic
copy number of somatic mutations. Ranksum of mutant vs. wildtype absolute copy number p value = 0.02. (E) Total somatic indel burden
of UPF2 E1033D mutants versus wildtype patients in the same cohort as the mutants. Ranksum of indel burden p value = 2.3 × 10−7

0
2
APOBEC
× 10 4
No. of mutations
4
6
0
0.5
Esophageal
× 10 4
No. of mutations
1
0
0.5
1
Smoking
× 10 4
No. of mutations
1.5
2
0
1
2
3
MSI
No. of mutations
× 10 4
4
5
0
1
2
POLE+MSI
No. of mutations
× 10 4
3
4
0
2
4
POLE
× 10 4
No. of mutations
6
8
0
2
4
UV
× 10 4
No. of mutations
6
8
0
2
CpG (Aging)
× 10 4
No. of mutations
4
6
C 
T
C 
A
C 
G
A
G
A
T
A
C
Mutation Context
Figure S4: Total mutation counts of the 96 trinucleotide substitutions in each mutational process-centric subcohort; related to Figure
5. Opaque bars show counts of mutations deﬁnitively attributed to the relevant mutational process (Bayesian NMF factor assignment
probability ≥0.75); transparent bars show counts of all other mutations in the process-centric subcohort not attributed to the relevant
mutational process.

GTCGC
CTCGT
TTCGT
CTCCT
TTCGC
TCCCA
TTCAT
TTCCT
ATCAT
TCCAT
TCCAC
CTCGC
TCCCT
TCCTT
TTCCC
TTCGG
TCCCC
TTCCA
TTCAC
TCCTC
TTCTC
CTCCC
TTCTT
ATCCT
TCCAG
ATCCA
TTCGA
CTCGG
ATCGC
TTCAG
ATCCC
ATCAC
CTCAT
ATCGT
GTCCT
ATCGA
TTCTG
ATCAG
GTCGT
CTCGA
TTCAA
TCCCG
TTCCG
GTCCG
ATCAA
CCCCT
CTCCA
ATCGG
CTCCG
ATCTT
TCCTG
CCCCG
GCCCT
TCCGT
TCCAA
CCCTT
CTCTT
GTCCC
ATCCG
CTCTG
GTCCA
CCCCC
Sequence context
-0.5
-0.4
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Fraction of additional variance
explained by XR-Seq covariate
1
10 -2
10 -4
10 -6
10 -8
10 -10
10 -12
10 -14
p value sans hairpin covariate
1
10 -2
10 -4
10 -6
10 -8
10 -10
10 -12
10 -14
p value with hairpin covariate
MB21D2 Q311E
AHR Q383H
MB21D2 Q311*
MROH2B E1109K
PDE3A L275L
RXRA D402N
TBC1D12 M1*
LPAR6 L277L
A
B
C
Figure S5: Properties of mutational processes; related to Figure 5. (A) Joint posterior distributions of geometric standard deviation eσ
for non-hypermutants vs. hypermutants. Each colored area is the 95% conﬁdence region for a pentamer context associated with a given
mutational process. Only mutational processes with sufﬁciently tight posterior densities in both the hypermutant and non-hypermutant
partitions are shown. (B) Variance explained by including XR-seq coverage as a covariate in the UV process-centric subcohort, stratiﬁed by
pentamer contexts around the 8 pyrimidine dimer trinucleotide contexts most affected by UV mutagenesis. Variance explained is presented
as the fold-change in the log-normal variance after including XR-seq coverage as a model covariate, relative to log-normal variance of
the model run with only the standard covariates. Bars represent 90% posterior conﬁdence intervals; central dashes represent posterior
means. (C) Comparison of Log-normal-Poisson model p values for APOBEC-induced hotspots in non-KCGs, with/without APOBEC hairpin
substrate optimality covariate. Grey regions indicate p values falling below 10% FDR threshold. Note simultaneous presence of missense
and nonsense events at the same nucleotide in MB21D2, and synonymous hotspots in PDE3A and LPAR6 — evidence that these events
are passenger hotspots under no positive selection.
