nature biotechnology  VOLUME 32  NUMBER 5  MAY 2014	
479
l e t t e r s
Comprehensive analyses of cancer genomes promise to inform 
prognoses and precise cancer treatments. A major barrier, 
however, is inaccessibility of metastatic tissue. A potential 
solution is to characterize circulating tumor cells (CTCs), 
but this requires overcoming the challenges of isolating rare 
cells and sequencing low-input material. Here we report an 
integrated process to isolate, qualify and sequence whole 
exomes of CTCs with high fidelity using a census-based 
sequencing strategy. Power calculations suggest that mapping 
of >99.995% of the standard exome is possible in CTCs. 
We validated our process in two patients with prostate 
cancer, including one for whom we sequenced CTCs, 
a lymph node metastasis and nine cores of the primary 
tumor. Fifty-one of 73 CTC mutations (70%) were present 
in matched tissue. Moreover, we identified 10 early trunk 
and 56 metastatic trunk mutations in the non-CTC tumor 
samples and found 90% and 73% of these mutations, 
respectively, in CTC exomes. This study establishes a 
foundation for CTC genomics in the clinic.
Enabling precision medicine for each patient with cancer depends 
on the ability to access samples that accurately represent the genomic 
features of his or her tumors1. Two critical bottlenecks, however, are 
that metastatic tissue is often inaccessible and the purity and yield of 
biopsy samples are low. So far, genomic characterization of cancer has 
emphasized large-scale sequencing of primary tumors and, in a few 
cases, metastatic lesions2. Both circulating tumor DNA3 and CTCs4 
are alternative sources that may overcome these sampling challenges. 
Comprehensive sequencing and confident determination of genomic 
variants in CTCs could provide routine monitoring of transiting cells 
with potential for metastatic colonization to complement the static 
sampling of resected or biopsied lesions5.
Technologies for enriching and enumerating CTCs have provided 
prognostic value4,6,7, and characterizing specific regions, genes or 
patterns of gene expression in CTCs is both possible and useful. 
PCR-based methods, array comparative genomic hybridization and 
high-throughput sequencing have revealed somatic single-nucleotide 
variants (SSNVs) and copy number alterations8–10, and RNA sequenc­
ing has shown pathways that are implicated in metastasis11. For exam­
ple, exome sequencing of lung cancer CTCs can uncover mutations 
shared with metastases10. Without comprehensive power statistics, 
however, it remains difficult to assess the fraction of CTC exomes 
that are being robustly and accurately sequenced and whether such 
approaches apply to other cancers such as prostate cancer.
Robust and accurate detection of SSNVs from CTCs is challenging. 
CTCs in a vial of blood are sparse12, and whole-genome amplification 
is necessary to construct sequencing libraries. Yields of amplified 
DNA vary among CTCs13, and whole-genome amplification intro­
duces amplification bias and polymerase errors14,15. Census-based 
sequencing of multiple libraries from the same sample (requiring a 
variant to be present in more than one library), therefore, has helped 
distinguish private mutations from polymerase errors with some 
fidelity14,15. Despite the technical capabilities demonstrated for 
sequencing CTCs, no generalizable framework exists for confidently 
calling SSNVs, and design optimization of the experimental processes 
could provide a critical foundation for future comprehensive surveys 
of the genomics of CTCs across large numbers of samples.
On the basis of these considerations, we developed a modular set of 
experimental and analytical protocols for census-based whole-exome 
sequencing (WES) and confident calling of SSNVs from prostate CTCs. 
Whole-exome sequencing of circulating tumor cells 
provides a window into metastatic prostate cancer
Jens G Lohr1–3,11, Viktor A Adalsteinsson1,4,11, Kristian Cibulskis1,11, Atish D Choudhury1–3, Mara Rosenberg1, 
Peter Cruz-Gordillo1, Joshua M Francis1,2, Cheng-Zhong Zhang1,2, Alex K Shalek5, Rahul Satija1, 
John J Trombetta1, Diana Lu1, Naren Tallapragada4, Narmin Tahirova4, Sora Kim1, Brendan Blumenstiel1, 
Carrie Sougnez1, Alarice Lowe6, Bang Wong1, Daniel Auclair1, Eliezer M Van Allen1–3, Mari Nakabayashi2,3, 
Rosina T Lis2, Gwo-Shu M Lee2, Tiantian Li2, Matthew S Chabot2, Amy Ly7, Mary-Ellen Taplin2,3, 
Thomas E Clancy2,3,6, Massimo Loda1–3,6, Aviv Regev1,8,9, Matthew Meyerson1–3, William C Hahn1–3,6, 
Philip W Kantoff2,3, Todd R Golub1–3,9, Gad Getz1,7, Jesse S Boehm1 & J Christopher Love1,4,10
1The Eli and Edythe L. Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. 2Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. 
3Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. 4Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, 
Massachusetts, USA. 5Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. 6Brigham and Women’s Hospital, 
Boston, Massachusetts, USA. 7Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. 8Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. 9Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, Maryland, USA. 10Ragon Institute of MGH, MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, 
Massachusetts, USA. 11These authors contributed equally to this work. Correspondence should be addressed to J.C.L. (clove@mit.edu), J.S.B. (boehm@broadinstitute.org) 
or G.G. (gadgetz@broadinstitute.org).
Received 25 October 2013; accepted 30 March 2014; published online 20 April 2014; doi:10.1038/nbt.2892
npg
© 2014 Nature America, Inc. All rights reserved.

480	
VOLUME 32  NUMBER 5  MAY 2014  nature biotechnology
l e t t e r s
We show that these techniques can provide a window into the 
genetics of metastatic prostate cancer in a manner that is potentially 
useful in the clinic.
We first created a standardized process to generate and qualify 
multiple independent libraries for WES from CTCs recovered from 
one vial of blood. The process involves cell enrichment and isola­
tion, genomic amplification, library qualification and census-based 
sequencing (Fig. 1a and Supplementary Fig. 1). We used the Illumina 
MagSweeper to enrich epithelial cell adhesion molecule (EpCAM)-
expressing CTCs16. The recovered cells, enriched with CTCs, were 
deposited into dense arrays of subnanoliter wells and imaged by auto­
mated epifluorescence imaging (Fig. 1b). Individual EpCAM+CD45− 
CTCs were recovered by robotic micromanipulation for whole-
genome amplification using multiple displacement amplification 
(MDA). This combined process reliably isolated single CTCs in a 
highly automated fashion (Supplementary Fig. 2).
We next validated our method for isolating CTCs. The yield of 
tumor cells spiked into whole blood was ≥85% (Supplementary 
Fig. 3) and concurred with an independent method for enrichment 
(Veridex CellSearch) (Supplementary Fig. 4). We also performed 
low-coverage single-cell RNA sequencing on cells recovered through 
our process from patients with prostate cancer to confirm that our 
isolated EpCAM+ cells expressed prostate-specific antigen (PSA), 
confirming their prostate origins (Supplementary Fig. 5). We then 
enriched and enumerated CTCs from 51 blood samples of 36 patients 
with metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) 
(Supplementary Table 1). We used the automated process for 45 
of the 51 samples and performed manual picking for the remaining 
6 samples. These samples yielded 0–200 CTCs per 3.75 ml of blood 
(median of 7 CTCs for samples with ≥1 CTC, with 27% having no 
detectable CTCs); 45% of samples had ≥5 CTCs, which is consistent 
with volume-adjusted counts previously reported in metastatic pros­
tate cancer12. The number of CTCs also correlated with serum levels 
of PSA (P = 0.004, Spearman, two tailed) (Fig. 1c).
We reasoned that establishing methods to assess the quality and uni­
formity of genome-wide coverage of CTC-derived sequencing libraries 
before in-depth WES or whole-genome sequencing would help make 
census-based genomic sequencing of CTCs cost efficient and facilitate 
subsequent analysis of SSNVs. To address this challenge, we first per­
formed whole-genome amplification  on all single CTCs isolated from 
five patients with 20 or more CTCs and for whom matched tumor 
tissue was available in tumor banks for comparison. As expected, the 
Figure 1  Experimental process for sequencing of CTCs. (a) Schematic of workflow for the enrichment, isolation and sequencing of CTCs. (b) Sample 
micrographs of CTCs isolated in nanowells with matched transmitted light (T.L.) and immunophenotyping for EpCAM, CD45 and 4,6-diamidino-2-
phenylindole (DAPI) by epifluorescence. (c) Scatter plot of the number of CTCs enumerated versus the levels of PSA from 51 blood samples from 36 
patients with prostate cancer (Supplementary Table 1) screened using the MagSweeper for enrichment. CTC numbers in the blood correlated with 
PSA levels (P = 0.004, Spearman, two tailed). (d) Scatter plot of the percentage of target bases covered >20× from WES versus the autocorrelation 
coefficient (Online Methods) calculated from low-pass whole-genome sequencing over chromosome 1 for patient CRPC_36 (P < 0.0001, Pearson, two 
tailed). WES yielded 124 ± 12× (mean ± s.d.) mean target coverage (Supplementary Table 2). Whole-genome sequencing yielded a mean coverage over 
chromosome 1 of between 0.0003× and 0.03×, with a median of 0.017×. (e) Genome-wide read densities (1-Mb bins) from low-pass whole-genome 
sequencing of CTC libraries from four different patients (CRPC_10, CRPC_12, CRPC_35 and CRPC_36). Examples of three quality libraries and one poor 
library are shown per patient. The log of the inverse correlation coefficient (corr. coeff.) was used to select high-quality libraries with a cutoff of −1.8.
npg
© 2014 Nature America, Inc. All rights reserved.

nature biotechnology  VOLUME 32  NUMBER 5  MAY 2014	
481
l e t t e r s
rates of success in amplification of single prostate CTCs varied widely 
(11–100%) (Supplementary Fig. 1), which is consistent with the vari­
ability reported for amplifying lung cancer CTCs13. To assess the level 
of amplification bias in the recovered products, we developed a rapid 
and cost-effective method using low-pass whole-genome sequencing 
(<0.05×) and autocorrelation analysis of single-base coverage to qual­
ify libraries before WES (Online Methods). This metric accurately 
predicted the fraction of well-covered targets in subsequent WES 
(P < 0.0001, Pearson, two tailed) (Fig. 1d). It also corresponded well to 
low-resolution views (1 Mb) of genome-wide read densities, highlight­
ing prominent hallmarks of copy-number variants in prostate cancer, 
including chromosome 8q amplification, 8p deletion and amplification 
of chromosome X (Fig. 1e)17. When a library generated insufficient 
coverage (~0.0001×) to calculate an autocorrelation coefficient accu­
rately, visual inspection of genome-wide read density could pro­
vide a qualitative means for qualification (Supplementary Fig. 6). 
Together these examples demonstrate that our integrated experi­
mental approach generates independent, high-quality libraries from 
single CTCs for WES and that low-pass whole-genome sequencing 
can reliably predict which single CTC sequencing libraries are likely 
to yield high-quality data.
We then implemented a sensitive method to detect SSNVs from 
CTC libraries. We selected WES to generate high-coverage sequenc­
ing data of maximally informative genomic regions to enable cost-
effective discovery of SSNVs. We sequenced 19 single CTC libraries 
of patient CRPC_36 to 124 ± 12× (mean ± s.d.) mean target coverage 
(Supplementary Table 2). As expected, individual libraries exhib­
ited nonuniform coverage with only a fraction of the exome present 
(Supplementary Fig. 7a)15 and bimodal allelic distortion at sites 
of germline heterozygous SNPs compared to normal distributions 
from bulk sequencing (Supplementary Fig. 7b). This effect caused 
improper genotyping at 38.3 ± 9.8% (mean ± s.d.) of such covered 
sites (Supplementary Fig. 8a). Coverage of either the alternate allele 
or both alleles ranged from 33.5% to 79.6% for individual CTCs and 
correlated strongly with the autocorrelation metric used for quality 
control (P < 0.0001, Spearman, two tailed) (Fig. 2a).
We hypothesized that combining data from independent CTC 
libraries would improve sensitivity. Indeed, the total coverage of 
both alleles (99.995%) at 22,054 SNP sites among 19 independent 
CTC libraries compared well to a representative bulk library from 
the primary tumor—only 0.005% of sites were improperly genotyped 
(Fig. 2a and Supplementary Fig. 8a). Analysis of whole exomes of 
CTCs from a second patient (CRPC_10) revealed similar extents of 
amplification bias that were also overcome by sequencing multiple 
independent libraries (Supplementary Figs. 7c,d and 8b,c). (We 
found that amplifying a single pool of CTCs was sensitive to the 
same allelic distortion as any other individual MDA-derived library 
(Supplementary Fig. 9a).) Together these observations are consistent 
with stochastic loss of DNA from single cells, random preferential 
amplification of alleles and lack of systematic coverage biases in MDA 
products14; they also confirm that sequencing multiple independent 
libraries of CTCs for a patient can enable robust, highly sensitive 
determination of variants.
We next sought to assess the specificity of this approach. We esti­
mated an upper bound for the rate of false positives by assuming that 
all variants, identified using MuTect18, not present in bulk tumor sam­
ples from the same patient were false positives (Online Methods). This 
assumption is conservative because contemporary CTCs may have 
diverged biologically from previously resected samples. Although 
amplifying and sequencing a pool of CTCs exhibited a false-positive 
rate (~10 per Mb) less than that for a single CTC library (~25 per Mb), 
this rate was still insufficient for accurate calling of mutations on its 
–0.5
0
Independent CTC libraries
Combined CTCs
Primary tumor
Alternate
Both
Reference
Fraction of het sites covered
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
log (1/corr. coeff.)
a
b
False positive rate per Mb
Required observations
c
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Relative sensitivity for CTC SSNVs
3
10
19
Libraries sequenced (in rank order)
All CTC SSNVs
CTC SSNVs also 
in primary/met
1
2
4
3
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12
0.05
0.10
0.5
1
5
10
50
100
500
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
0.3
Sensitivity
3 observations
0.05
0.5
5
50
500
False positive rate per Mb
51
73
d
–1.0
–1.5
15
51/73 (70%)
5
n.d.
a b c d e f
g h
i
j
k
l m n o p q r
s
Figure 2  Census-based variant calling from WES of CTCs from patient CRPC_36. (a) Characterization of allelic coverage in each CTC sequencing library 
from the same patient compared to those libraries combined and the primary tumor as determined by 22,054 germline heterozygous (het) SNP sites; 
an allele was scored as covered if there were three total reads of the particular allele. For reference, the autocorrelation coefficient is plotted below all 
CTC libraries except for three CTC libraries (n.d., not determined) that had insufficient low-pass whole-genome sequencing coverage but passed quality 
control before exome sequencing on the basis of visual inspection of genome-wide read densities (Supplementary Fig. 6). Coverage of the alternate 
allele (either the alternate alone or both alleles) at germline heterozygous SNPs was correlated with the autocorrelation metric for individual CTC 
libraries (P < 0.0001, Spearman, two tailed). When the individual CTC libraries were combined (combined CTCs), 99.995% of sites were covered by 
both alleles, which is similar to bulk sequencing of the primary tumor. (b) Estimation of false-positive rate per Mb among 19 independent CTC libraries 
after requiring the variant to be observed in at least n independent CTC libraries (Supplementary Fig. 10). The gray dashed line indicates the reported 
mutation rate in bulk tumor sequencing of treated prostate cancer (~2 per Mb)19; the black arrowhead indicates the false-positive rate per Mb observed 
for a single CTC library. The inset shows sensitivity versus false-positive rate per Mb as a function of the required number of independent observations 
of the variant. (c) The number of SSNVs called in total among 19 CTC libraries (73) and those that were validated as being present in matched tumor 
tissue (51). Primary/met indicates primary tumor and/or matched metastasized tumor tissue. (d) Relative sensitivity to call CTC SSNVs (fraction of the 
total number called using 19 CTC libraries) as a function of the number of libraries sequenced ranked in order by the autocorrelation coefficient 
(blue bars). A sustained improvement in sensitivity was observed. Additionally, considering only the 51 CTC SSNVs also observed in bulk WES of 
matched tumor tissue, we observed a very similar increase in sensitivity for each additional library sequenced (gray bars).
npg
© 2014 Nature America, Inc. All rights reserved.

482	
VOLUME 32  NUMBER 5  MAY 2014  nature biotechnology
l e t t e r s
own (Supplementary Fig. 9b). When combining multiple single CTC 
libraries, however, the false-positive rate of called SSNVs dropped 
substantially from ~500 per Mb (n = 1 library) to a rate below the 
expected mutational rate in treated prostate cancer (~2 per Mb) when 
observed across two or more CTCs (Fig. 2b)14,15,19. When increasing 
the number of multiple observations required (Supplementary 
Fig. 10), the false-positive rate further diminished to 0.9 per Mb 
(n = 3) with an estimated sensitivity of 82.6% (Fig. 2b, inset). Analysis 
of six CTCs from CRPC_10 supported our statistical predictions 
from CRPC_36 that census-based sequencing also improves 
specificity (Supplementary Fig. 11a).
Applying this analytical method to the 19 CTCs from CRPC_36, 
we detected 73 SSNVs (n = 3; Supplementary Table 3). We found 
that 51 of these SSNVs (70%) were also present among 9 cores 
from the matched primary tumor and a lymph node metastasis, 
confirming that these EpCAM+ cells were genetically related to the 
primary prostate cancer in this patient (Fig. 2c). Similarly apply­
ing this analytical method to the 6 CTCs from CRPC_10 sequenced 
to 89 ± 8× (mean ± s.d.) mean target coverage (Supplementary Table 2), 
12 of 22 CTC SSNVs called (55%) (Supplementary Table 4) were also 
present among 12 cores from the primary tumor (Supplementary 
Fig. 11b). Overall, the sensitivity of this technique increases with 
the number of CTC libraries included in the analysis and reached 
a relative sensitivity of 88% using 10 of 19 libraries from CRPC_36 
(Fig. 2d).
The results described above suggest that comprehensive sequenc­
ing of prostate CTCs and accurate assessments of SSNVs are possi­
ble with our approach. We then hypothesized that CTC sequencing 
could have clinical utility, perhaps providing a reasonable proxy for 
metastatic sampling in disseminated cancer. Clinical sequencing in 
metastatic prostate cancer is challenging because metastatic tissue is 
not routinely sampled20 and computed topographic–guided biopsy 
has a poor success rate with a low purity of biopsied lesions21. For 
patient CRPC_36, there was widespread metastatic disease (Fig. 3a). 
Although the vast majority of the metastases (over ten) were not avail­
able for sequencing, one neck lymph node had been resected 6 months 
before CTC collection. Of the 93 SSNVs detected in this metastasis, 
47 (51%) were detected in CTCs (Fig. 3b). Owing to the timing of 
the sample acquisition, the CTCs sequenced could not have derived 
from this particular metastasis, so nonoverlapping mutations could 
reflect divergent evolution at different sites, as has been demonstrated 
previously in prostate cancer22,23.
a
FDG-avid
metastatic
disease
FDG-PET
Anterior
Posterior
Bone scan
b
47
CTC
Met
46
26
Met
19 single
CTCs
Focus of primary tumor
ANK3
NAV2
TP53
MUC16
EPHB1
DNAH8
AHNAK2
ARID1B
SSPO
RP1
TAF1L
ADCY3
c
5
5
4
5
4
5 3−5 4
4
Gleason score
SPTA1
Not in CTCs
CTC + another site
SSNVs
No power
None detected
Private in CTCs
Met trunk
Early trunk
e
CTC (41)
Met trunk (56)
41/56 (73%)
Early trunk (10)
CTC (9)
9/10 (90%)
d
TP53*
NAV2*
FCGR3B*
C4BPB
CACNA1E
MUC16*
ROD1*
NEU2
LDB2
CLDN14
TTN*
FAT4*
OR2G2*
HOMEZ*
SNX6*
ALOX15B
ST5*
Radical
prostatectomy
Bone mets
 detected
Lymph-node
resection
CTC collection
5B
5C 4A
4B
R
L
2A
2C
2B
8B
0
2
4.8
5.3
Year
5A
Met
CTC
Posterior
Anterior
Locations of tissue samples from prostate
Foci in tissue samples
GPR158*
Jaccard distance
0.4
0.6
0.8
Figure 3  Comparison of mutation 
pattern across CTCs, primary 
cores and metastasized tumor 
from patient CRPC_36. 
(a) Fludeoxyglucose (FDG)-PET 
and bone scans show widespread 
metastatic disease. FDG-PET 
maximum intensity projection 
(MIP) image (top left) and axial 
FDG-PET slice (bottom left) 
demonstrate multifocal FDG-avid skeletal metastases throughout the axial and appendicular skeleton, as well as bilateral cervical, left supraclavicular 
(arrowheads), retroperitoneal and bilateral common iliac metastatic lymphadenopathy. The bone scan demonstrates widespread bone metastasis. 
(b) Venn diagram representing mutations called in the CTCs and metastasis (Met). Of note, 51% of mutations in the metastasis were called in CTCs. 
(c) Hierarchical clustering using the Jaccard index for mutations called across the nine primary cores, the metastasized tumor and CTCs (when observed 
in ≥3 out of 19 single CTCs). Only sites in the exomes that were considered to be powered for mutation calling, as described in Online Methods, were 
included in this analysis. Green shading represents presence in CTCs and at least one other sample (dark green) or not present in CTCs (light green). 
Genes highlighted indicate nonsynonymous mutations present in more than two patients from a previous sequencing study in prostate cancer30. Of note, 
one of the cores included regions of both Gleason 3 and Gleason 5 cancer (indicated as ‘3–5’). (d) Dendrogram representing hierarchical clustering by 
Jaccard index and the timeline of sample acquisition. SSNVs detected in all individual cores of tissue (early trunk) or in all cores that belong to only 
one of the two branchpoints of the clustering dendrogram are listed. Nonsynonymous mutations are highlighted in bold with asterisks. The areas shaded 
in pink represent the pathology blocks from which cores of tissue were obtained (drawn to scale). The dotted lines represent the area with histological 
presence of tumor within each block. The sites from which the individual cores of tissue were obtained for sequencing are displayed in colors 
corresponding to the cluster dendrogram and those in c. The regions of the prostate from which the pathology blocks were retrieved are schematized. 
(e) The number of mutations found in the metastasis and at least one core of the primary tumor (metastatic trunk), the early trunk mutations and 
the overlap of these with CTC mutations excluding sites that were consistently underpowered in greater than half of the samples. The one early trunk 
mutation not detected in CTCs (n ≥ 3) was observed in two CTCs.
npg
© 2014 Nature America, Inc. All rights reserved.

nature biotechnology  VOLUME 32  NUMBER 5  MAY 2014	
483
l e t t e r s
We next asked whether sequencing CTCs could uncover mutations 
present early in tumor evolution (early trunk mutations) or in the 
inferred metastatic precursor (metastatic trunk mutations)24. Such 
founder mutations in other cancer types (for example, mutations in 
BRAF in malignant melanoma or in KIT in gastrointestinal stromal 
tumors) are excellent therapeutic targets25,26. Detecting such mutations 
in patients with various types of metastatic tumors through simple 
blood draws might therefore have considerable clinical utility.
We compared the landscape of mutations in CTCs and the meta­
static sample to multiple samples from the patient’s primary prostate 
tumor resected 5.3 years earlier. Because prostate cancer is often his­
tologically multifocal27, we sequenced nine spatially distinct foci of 
the primary tumor in regions of uniform Gleason grade (Gleason 4 
or 5) with one exception noted (Fig. 3c). To assess relationships 
between these foci, the CTCs and the metastasis sample, we per­
formed hierarchical clustering, excluding sites that were consistently 
underpowered in more than half of the samples (owing to lack of 
coverage) (Fig. 3c). Indeed, the primary tumor foci exhibited marked 
heterogeneity, but as expected, foci from similar physical regions of 
the tumor were more closely related to each other than those from 
other locations (Fig. 3c,d). Notably, we also identified one particular 
focus that most closely resembled the CTCs and the metastasis, sug­
gesting that this focus may share a more recent common ancestor with 
the CTCs than other foci. Although this focus had a Gleason score 
of 5, the score itself did not predict the likely metastatic precursor, as 
other Gleason 5 regions were not in this evolutionary branch.
We found ten SSNVs, including a mutation in TP53, that were 
ubiquitous among all primary foci and metastasis, suggesting the 
cancer arose from a single ancestor with divergent evolution there­
after (Fig. 3d). The CTCs had nine of ten (90%) of these early trunk 
mutations (Fig. 3e). Notably, despite allelic distortion, these muta­
tions were present in a greater fraction of CTCs (corrected for power) 
than the non-trunk mutations on average (P = 0.0012, Wilcoxon rank 
sum test). Fifty-six mutations were present in both the metastasis 
and primary tumor (any foci), and the CTCs had 41 (73%) of these 
metastatic trunk mutations (Fig. 3e). For patient CRPC_10, we 
found that the CTCs had all three early trunk mutations for 
which they were powered (out of nine) (Supplementary Fig. 11c). 
Together, these proof-of-concept data support the notion that 
CTC sequencing can reveal early mutations in tumor evolution and 
those that could be shared among metastatic sites. As such trunk 
mutations are likely to be present in the majority of sites in patients 
with advanced cancer, these results suggest clinical utility for system­
atic CTC genomics.
Here we have demonstrated the feasibility of sequencing whole 
exomes of prostate CTCs and confidently calling SSNVs to pro­
vide a minimally invasive window into the mutational landscape of 
metastatic prostate cancer. We implemented a systematic process to 
obtain, qualify and sequence whole exomes of CTCs and call SSNVs. 
Applying this process to two individual patients showed that sequenc­
ing of multiple independent CTC libraries can achieve full coverage of 
the exome territory that is accessible in bulk sequencing and a false-
positive rate below the expected mutational rate in prostate cancer.
As implemented, the current process works well for patients from 
whom five or more single CTCs are recovered from 3.75 ml of blood and 
high-quality libraries generated for sequencing. The numbers of CTCs 
can vary substantially among different types of cancer12, so sequencing 
of CTCs may not apply directly to all patients with cancer. Nonetheless, 
advancing the individual technologies used to recover and amplify as 
many CTCs as possible from patients would increase the numbers of can­
cers for which this approach could benefit. For instance, enriching CTCs 
on the basis of physical separation or microfluidics rather than expression 
of EpCAM6, processing greater volumes of blood or using other means 
of whole-genome amplification that improve uniformity in genome-
wide coverage of the amplified DNA could all increase the numbers of 
CTC libraries available15. The designed modularity of our approach can 
accommodate new emerging technologies for the enrichment and isola­
tion of CTCs, whole-genome amplification28 and sequencing platforms. 
Furthermore, as the costs of library preparation, hybrid selection and 
sequencing decline, we anticipate that census-based sequencing will 
become more cost effective for monitoring more patients.
The approach described here does not emphasize private muta­
tions that may be held by individual CTCs. Such analysis of hetero­
geneity is extremely challenging because variants in individual cells 
can be absent for either technical (allelic distortion or false positive) 
or biological (subclonality in the population) reasons. Although we 
identified many mutations in single-cell libraries, our census-based 
approach deprioritizes these mutations because we could not distin­
guish them from false positives. 
Exome sequencing of circulating tumor DNA has also demonstrated 
concordance of variants with tumor biopsies29. Although such DNA 
is fragmented and has a similarly low abundance, these materials may 
provide a complementary source for reducing false-positive calls or 
revealing other mutations that are not sampled among sparse CTCs.
Nonetheless, our results suggest that CTC sequencing could aug­
ment both large-scale efforts to map the genetics of cancer and clinical 
sequencing from individual patients with cancer. A focus on evolution­
arily early and shared metastatic events such as those identified by the 
proof-of-concept study here would be critical for precision medicine. The 
integrated process may also enable longitudinal monitoring of the genetic 
state of disseminated cancer, revealing important insights in tumor evo­
lution, metastatic dissemination and resistance to therapeutics.
Methods
Methods and any associated references are available in the online 
version of the paper.
Accession codes. Sequencing data have been deposited in dbGaP 
under accession code phs000717.v1.p1.
Note: Any Supplementary Information and Source Data files are available in the 
online version of the paper.
Acknowledgments
J.G.L. was supported by a Conquer Cancer Foundation Young Investigator Award, 
US National Institutes of Health grant 5P50CA100707-10 (DF/HCC SPORE) and the 
Wong Family Award. V.A.A. was supported in part by a graduate fellowship from the 
National Science Foundation. A.D.C. is supported by the Prostate Cancer Foundation 
Young Investigator Award and the Department of Defense Physician Scientist 
Training Award. J.C.L. is a Camille Dreyfus Teacher-Scholar. We acknowledge the 
Arthur and Linda Gelb Center for Translational Research for the acquisition and 
annotation of clinical samples and A. Abbott and A. Van Den Abbeele from the 
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute (DFCI) Department of Imaging for positron-emission 
tomography (PET) images. We also acknowledge P.K. Brastianos (Department of 
Medical Oncology, DFCI) and I. Dunn (Department of Neurosurgery, Brigham and 
Women’s Hospital) for contributing samples for CTC analysis, D. Peck for help with 
technology development, O. Voznesensky and S. Balk for purification of DNA from 
the metastatic tumor for sequencing, C. Whittaker and S.S. Levine for advice on 
sequencing and analysis and the Broad Genomics Platform for the development of 
new sequencing approaches used here. This work was also supported in part by the 
Koch Institute Support (core) grant P30-CA14051 from the National Cancer Institute, 
and we thank the Koch Institute Swanson Biotechnology Center for technical 
support, specifically the BioMicroCenter. This work was also supported in part by 
Janssen Pharmaceuticals, Inc. and the Klarman Family Foundation. We would like to 
thank Illumina for providing the MagSweeper. The authors dedicate this paper to the 
memory of Officer Sean Collier, for his caring service to the MIT community and for 
his sacrifice.
npg
© 2014 Nature America, Inc. All rights reserved.

484	
VOLUME 32  NUMBER 5  MAY 2014  nature biotechnology
l e t t e r s
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
J.G.L. and V.A.A. designed and performed experiments, analyzed data and wrote 
the manuscript. K.C. and M.R. developed computational methods, analyzed data 
and wrote the manuscript. A.D.C. provided clinical samples and patient data and 
analyzed clinical data. P.C.-G., N. Tahirova and S.K. performed experiments for 
isolating CTCs. J.M.F. developed single-cell sequencing methods and designed 
experiments. C.-Z.Z. analyzed data and applied the autocorrelation methods. 
A.K.S., R.S., J.J.T. and D.L. performed single-cell RNA sequencing and data 
analysis. N. Tallapragada developed code for determining CTCs to recover from 
nanowells. B.B. performed early technology development. C.S. and D.A. performed 
sample and data management and gave conceptual advice. A. Lowe and A. Ly 
performed experiments comparing our process to the Veridex CellSearch System. 
E.M.V.A. analyzed sequencing data. M.N., G.-S.M.L., T.L. and M.S.C. coordinated 
and acquired clinical samples. R.T.L. reviewed pathology slides and guided 
selection of clinical samples. B.W. performed data visualization. T.E.C. provided 
samples and validated methods for isolating CTCs. M.-E.T., M.L., A.R., M.M., 
W.C.H. and P.W.K. supervised experiments and sample and data collection and 
edited the manuscript. T.R.G., G.G., J.S.B. and J.C.L. designed the experimental 
strategy, supervised the analysis and wrote the manuscript. All authors discussed 
the results and implications and reviewed the manuscript. 
COMPETING FINANCIAL INTERESTS
The authors declare competing financial interests: details are available in the online 
version of the paper.
Reprints and permissions information is available online at http://www.nature.com/
reprints/index.html.
1.	 Garraway, L.A. Genomics-driven oncology: framework for an emerging paradigm. 
J. Clin. Oncol. 31, 1806–1814 (2013).
2.	 International Cancer Genome Consortium. et al. International network of cancer 
genome projects. Nature 464, 993–998 (2010); erratum 465, 966 (2010).
3.	 Dawson, S.-J. et al. Analysis of circulating tumor DNA to monitor metastatic breast 
cancer. N. Engl. J. Med. 368, 1199–1209 (2013).
4.	 Cristofanilli, M. et al. Circulating tumor cells: a novel prognostic factor for 
newly diagnosed metastatic breast cancer. J. Clin. Oncol. 23, 1420–1430 
(2005).
5.	 Zhang, L. et al. The identification and characterization of breast cancer CTCs 
competent for brain metastasis. Sci. Transl. Med. 5, 180ra48 (2013).
6.	 Yu, M. et al. Circulating tumor cells: approaches to isolation and characterization. 
J. Cell Biol. 192, 373–382 (2011).
7.	 Cohen, S.J. et al. Relationship of circulating tumor cells to tumor response, 
progression-free survival, and overall survival in patients with metastatic colorectal 
cancer. J. Clin. Oncol. 26, 3213–3221 (2008).
8.	 Maheswaran, S. et al. Detection of mutations in EGFR in circulating lung-cancer 
cells. N. Engl. J. Med. 359, 366–377 (2008).
9.	 Heitzer, E. et al. Complex tumor genomes inferred from single circulating tumor 
cells by array-CGH and next-generation sequencing. Cancer Res. 73, 2965–2975 
(2013).
10.	Ni, X. et al. Reproducible copy number variation patterns among single circulating 
tumor cells of lung cancer patients. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 110, 21083–21088 
(2013).
11.	Yu, M. et al. RNA sequencing of pancreatic circulating tumour cells implicates 
WNT signalling in metastasis. Nature 487, 510–513 (2012).
12.	Allard, W.J. et al. Tumor cells circulate in the peripheral blood of all major 
carcinomas but not in healthy subjects or patients with nonmalignant diseases. 
Clin. Cancer Res. 10, 6897–6904 (2004).
13.	Swennenhuis, J.F. et al. Efficiency of whole genome amplification of single 
circulating tumor cells enriched by CellSearch and sorted by FACS. Genome Med. 
5, 106 (2013).
14.	Hou, Y. et al. Single-cell exome sequencing and monoclonal evolution of a JAK2-
negative myeloproliferative neoplasm. Cell 148, 873–885 (2012).
15.	Zong, C. et al. Genome-wide detection of single-nucleotide and copy-number 
variations of a single human cell. Science 338, 1622–1626 (2012).
16.	Cann, G.M. et al. mRNA-Seq of single prostate cancer circulating tumor cells reveals 
recapitulation of gene expression and pathways found in prostate cancer. PLoS ONE 
7, e49144 (2012).
17.	El Gammal, A.T. et al. Chromosome 8p deletions and 8q gains are associated with 
tumor progression and poor prognosis in prostate cancer. Clin. Cancer Res. 16, 
56–64 (2010).
18.	Cibulskis, K. et al. Sensitive detection of somatic point mutations in impure and 
heterogeneous cancer samples. Nat. Biotechnol. 31, 213–219 (2013).
19.	Grasso, C.S. et al. The mutational landscape of lethal castration-resistant prostate 
cancer. Nature 487, 239–243 (2012).
20.	Beltran, H. et al. New strategies in prostate cancer: translating genomics into the 
clinic. Clin. Cancer Res. 19, 517–523 (2013).
21.	Ross, R.W. et al. Predictors of prostate cancer tissue acquisition by an undirected 
core bone marrow biopsy in metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer—a 
Cancer and Leukemia Group B study. Clin. Cancer Res. 11, 8109–8113 (2005).
22.	Robbins, C.M. et al. Copy number and targeted mutational analysis reveals novel 
somatic events in metastatic prostate tumors. Genome Res. 21, 47–55 (2011).
23.	Nickerson, M.L. et al. Somatic alterations contributing to metastasis of a castration-
resistant prostate cancer. Hum. Mutat. 34, 1231–1241 (2013).
24.	Gerlinger, M. et al. Intratumor heterogeneity and branched evolution revealed by 
multiregion sequencing. N. Engl. J. Med. 366, 883–892 (2012).
25.	Chapman, P.B. et al. Improved survival with vemurafenib in melanoma with BRAF 
V600E mutation. N. Engl. J. Med. 364, 2507–2516 (2011).
26.	Heinrich, M.C. et al. Kinase mutations and imatinib response in patients with 
metastatic gastrointestinal stromal tumor. J. Clin. Oncol. 21, 4342–4349 (2003).
27.	Lindberg, J. et al. Exome sequencing of prostate cancer supports the hypothesis 
of independent tumour origins. Eur. Urol. 63, 347–353 (2013).
28.	Gole, J. et al. Massively parallel polymerase cloning and genome sequencing of 
single cells using nanoliter microwells. Nat. Biotechnol. 31, 1126–1132 (2013).
29.	Murtaza, M. et al. Non-invasive analysis of acquired resistance to cancer therapy 
by sequencing of plasma DNA. Nature 497, 108–112 (2013).
30.	Barbieri, C.E. et al. Exome sequencing identifies recurrent SPOP, FOXA1 and 
MED12 mutations in prostate cancer. Nat. Genet. 44, 685–689 (2012).
npg
© 2014 Nature America, Inc. All rights reserved.

nature biotechnology
doi:10.1038/nbt.2892
ONLINE METHODS
Patient recruitment. Eligible patients were metastatic patients with CRPC 
who had (i) progression on a phase 2 study of abiraterone in combination 
with dutasteride (DFCI Protocol # 10-448, Institutional Review Board (IRB) 
expiration date 2/7/2014) or (ii) PSA >20 ng/ml and progressive disease based 
on rising PSA and scan progression to enrich for patients likely to have detect­
able circulating tumor cells. There is no PSA cutoff for the phase 2 study 
itself. The Prostate Clinical Research Information System (CRIS) database 
at DFCI was used to identify metastatic patients with CRPC. The CRIS sys­
tem comprises data-entry software, a central data repository, collection of 
patient data, including comprehensive follow-up of all patients, and tightly 
integrated security measures, as previously described31. All patients provided 
written informed consent to allow the collection of tissue and blood and the 
analysis of clinical and genetic data for research purposes (DFCI Protocol 
#01-045, IRB expiration date 3/20/2014). After initial screening of patients 
with metastatic CRPC, chart review was performed by a physician to iden­
tify those patients who had progressive disease as described above. Blood 
specimens were prospectively collected from eligible patients. Supplementary 
Table 1 shows patient information. Blood was drawn in EDTA tubes and 
transported at room temperature to the Broad Institute within 3 h.
Patient characteristics. The clinical course of one of the patients described here 
(CRPC_36) was as follows: at the age of 54, the patient was diagnosed with a 
T3, Gleason 9, PSA 10 prostate cancer. He was treated on a research trial of neo­
adjuvant docetaxel and bevacizumab. At prostatectomy, he had a pT3b, N1 tumor. 
He next received adjuvant radiation and androgen deprivation therapy (ADT). 
Upon rising PSA, continuous ADT was reinitiated, and he was treated with 
sequential bicalutamide and nilutamide. Seventeen months after initial diagno­
sis, he developed metastases and was treated with the following therapies until 
his death 6 years after his presentation: docetaxel, phase 1 trial of PI3-kinase and 
MEK kinase inhibitor, sipuleucel-T, XL-184, abiraterone, enzalutamide, cabazi­
taxel, palliative radiation to bone and combined abiraterone and enzalutamide. 
At the time of CTC isolation, he received abiraterone and enzalutamide, and 
a lymph node biopsy was performed while he received enzalutamide. A basic 
summary of the timeline of events is illustrated in Figure 3d.
Enrichment of CTCs from blood. For each 3.75 ml of blood, red blood 
cell (RBC) lysis was first performed using 1× Pharm Lyse solution 
(BD Biosciences). The RBC-depleted sample was then incubated with four 
tests of fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)-conjugated antibody to CD45 (20 µl 
of antibody per 100 µl) (eBiosciences; clone HI30) for 30 min at 4 °C, followed 
by incubation with anti-EpCAM magnetic beads (Illumina)16 for 30 min at 
4 °C. Phycoerythrin (PE)-conjugated antibody to EpCAM (20 µl per 1 ml, 
BD Biosciences; clone EBA-1) was then added for 30 min at 4 °C before 
immunomagnetic isolation using the Illumina MagSweeper16.
Isolation of CTCs. Isolation of CTCs from the enriched samples from the 
MagSweeper was performed using either the nanowell-based method with 
automated imaging and robotic retrieval of single cells or a six-well dish with 
manual imaging and pipetting. For the nanowell-based approach, enriched 
samples were loaded into the wells of a 1 × 3 in polydimethylsiloxane nano­
well device containing a 24 × 72 array of 7 × 7 wells, each of the dimensions 
50 × 50 × 50 µm (Supplementary Fig. 2)32. Automated epifluorescence imag­
ing of the array was performed (Zeiss), and images were processed using a 
custom software program. After manual review of candidate cells with cus­
tom CTC analysis software (EVA), candidate CTCs (DAPI−CD45−EpCAM+) 
were retrieved from individual wells of the device using an automated robotic 
micromanipulator (CellCelector, ALS) and deposited within 3-µl droplets of 
Superblock/PBS (Thermo Scientific) into empty wells of a 96-well PCR plate. 
For the manual approach, candidate CTCs (DAPI−CD45−EpCAM+) were 
recovered from Superblock/PBS by pipetting 3 µl into a 96-well PCR plate. 
PCR plates were frozen down at −80 °C until ready for further processing.
Lysis and whole-genome amplification of CTCs. Each PCR plate containing 
frozen CTCs was thawed on ice, and the volume of the individual wells was 
diluted to 5 µl using UltraPure water (Invitrogen). 5 µl of lysis buffer, contain­
ing 0.4 M KOH (Sigma Aldrich) and 80 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) (Qiagen), 
was added to each well, and the plate was sealed, gently shaken to mix, spun 
down at 300 r.c.f. for 1 min and incubated for 10 min at 50 °C using a thermal 
cycler (Eppendorf). After lysis, the plate was spu down at 300 r.c.f. for 1 min, 
5 µl of 0.4 M HCl (Fluka) was added to each well and the plate was kept on ice. 
Master mix for whole-genome amplification by MDA was prepared by adding, 
for each reaction, 26.25 µl of sterile water, 5 µl of 10× reaction buffer from 
the RepliPHI kit (Epicentre), 0.5 µl of 10 mg/ml bovine serum albumin (BSA) 
(NEB), 0.2 µl of 1 M DTT (Qiagen), 0.8 µl of 25 mM dNTPs from the RepliPHI 
kit (Epicentre), 1.25 µl of 10 mM random hexamers (NNNN*N*N) from IDT 
and 1 µl of RepliPHI enzyme from the RepliPHI kit (EpiCentre). 35 µl of this 
master mix was added to each well of the PCR plate containing lysed genomic 
DNA and incubated for 2 h at 30 °C on a thermal cycler (Eppendorf). After 
the MDA reaction, clean up was performed using AmpureXP beads (Beckman 
Coulter). Briefly, 100 µl of AmpureXP beads were added to each sample and 
incubated for 5 min at room temperature. The samples were then placed on a 
96-well plate magnet (Invitrogen) and incubated for 5 min. Supernatant was 
removed from each sample, and 100 µl of fresh 70% ethanol (Koptec) was 
added and removed twice to wash the beads. After complete removal of the 
ethanol and drying for 10 min at room temperature, beads were resuspended 
in 60 µl of Tris-EDTA buffer, pH 8 (Teknova), incubated for 5 min at room 
temperature and placed back on the magnet for 5 min, and then cleaned-up 
products were transferred to a new PCR plate. These MDA products were 
quantified using the Quant-lT PicoGreen dsDNA assay kit (Invitrogen), and 
products with concentrations greater than the negative control were selected 
for low-pass whole-genome sequencing.
Library preparation and low-pass whole-genome sequencing. Whole-genome 
sequencing libraries were prepared using the Nextera DNA Sample Prep 
Kit (Illumina), quantified using the Library Quantification Kit for Illumina 
(Kapa Biosystems) and pooled and loaded at 12 pM onto the Illumina MiSeq 
sequencer using the MiSeq Reagent Kit v2 (Illumina). Up to 96 libraries can 
be multiplexed in the same run. The MiSeq Reporter (Illumina) was used to 
align reads and generate BAM files, and IGV Tools (Broad Institute) was used 
to bin the genome for coverage at 1-Mb intervals and generate TDF files. The 
TDF files were viewed in the Integrative Genomics Viewer (IGV) to visually 
inspect genome-wide uniformity in coverage of each MDA product.
Calculation of autocorrelation coefficient and selection of CTC libraries. 
Using the data from low-pass whole-genome sequencing, we computed the 
degree of correlation in single-base coverage over various distances, normal­
ized by the mean target coverage, for each library. The DepthOfCoverage 
module from GATK was used to compute single-base coverage (http://www.
broadinstitute.org/gatk/) using a minimum mapping quality of 5, and the 
autocorrelation coefficient represents the magnitude (not the length scale or 
genomics distance of correlation) of the correlation in single base coverage at 
1-kb distances normalized by the mean sequencing depth. 1 kb represents a 
length scale that is well above the average fragment length yet is short enough 
to capture local biases in coverage due to preferential overamplification in 
whole-genome amplification. In our study, the autocorrelation analysis was 
computed over chromosome 1 because it is the largest chromosome, does not 
have visible copy-number alterations from both whole-genome sequencing 
and WES read coverage and provides the analysis with the most statistical 
power. The analysis could have been performed on other chromosomes, too. 
Chromothripsis, although rare, would only affect the correlation near trans­
location junctions, which would be a small fraction of the chromosome and 
would have negligible effects on the analysis.
Libraries were ranked on the basis of autocorrelation coefficient. In this 
study, we selected libraries for WES that had the logarithm of (1/autocorrela­
tion coefficient) greater than −1.8. In the rare event of insufficient coverage 
(~0.0001×) for computing of the autocorrelation coefficient, visual inspection 
of genome-wide read densities may be used to include samples with seemingly 
uniform genomic coverage, as demonstrated in Supplementary Figure 6.
Isolation of genomic DNA from blood and tumor tissue. Genomic DNA was 
isolated from blood to control for germline variants using the DNeasy Blood and 
Tissue Kit (Qiagen). 100 µl of anticoagulated blood was added to 20 µl proteinase K 
and adjusted to a 220 µl volume with PBS. 200 µl of Buffer AL (from the DNeasy 
npg
© 2014 Nature America, Inc. All rights reserved.

nature biotechnology
doi:10.1038/nbt.2892
Blood and Tissue Kit) was added, mixed and incubated at 56 °C for 10 min. All 
subsequent steps were performed per the manufacturer’s recommendations.
Genomic DNA and RNA were isolated from primary tumor tissue using the 
AllPrep DNA/RNA Mini Kit (Qiagen) and from metastatic tumor tissue using 
the AllPrep DNA/RNA Micro Kit (Qiagen) following the manufacturer’s rec­
ommendations. Primary tumor tissue consisted of blocks of fresh frozen tissue 
acquired at the time of radical prostatectomy frozen in optimal cutting tem­
perature (OCT) medium and stored in liquid nitrogen at the Gelb Center for 
Translational Research. Accompanying slides were reviewed by a pathologist, and 
tumor boundaries were marked at the time of storage. Slides were re-reviewed 
at the time of retrieval for the presence of tumor, regions of Gleason 3, 4 and 5 
within the tumor were identified, and the areas were marked. Nine representative 
tumor foci were chosen to maximize the distance between the cores, favoring 
regions of higher Gleason grade. Each block was removed from the cassette, 
placed on a Petri dish on dry ice to keep cold and aligned with the accompanying 
marked slide to identify the selected foci. Blocks were cored using a Miltex 2-mm 
Disposable Biopsy Punch with Plunger, placed into a DNA LoBind Eppendorf 
tube and stored at −80 °C until the time of nucleic acid extraction.
Metastatic tumor tissue consisted of blocks of fresh frozen tissue acquired from exci­
sion of the left supraclavicular lymph node and frozen in OCT medium. Tumor shav­
ings were obtained at the time of sectioning the OCT block for immunohistochemistry. 
About 100–300-µm shavings were obtained using a cryostat, placed into a DNA LoBind 
Eppendorf tube and stored at −80 °C until the time of nucleic acid extraction.
Selection of libraries and WES. WES was performed as previously described33. 
Briefly, 100 ng of DNA from each sample was used for library preparation, which 
included shearing and ligation of sequencing adaptors. Exome capture was per­
formed using the Agilent v2 Human Exon bait kit. Captured DNA was sequenced 
using the Illumina HiSeq platform, and paired-end sequencing reads were gener­
ated for each sample. Initial alignment and quality control were performed using 
the Picard and Firehose pipelines at the Broad Institute. Picard generates a single 
BAM file for each sample that includes reads, calibrated quantities and align­
ments to the genome. Firehose is a set of tools for analyzing sequencing data from 
tumor and matched normal DNA. The pipeline uses GenePattern as its execution 
engine and performs quality control, local realignment, mutation calling and 
coverage calculations, among other analyses. Complete details of this pipeline 
can be found in Stransky et al.34 or at http://www.broadinstitute.org/cancer/cga/. 
Sequencing was performed to an average target coverage of >120×.
Calling of SSNVs from WES data. Reads were aligned to the reference human 
genome build hg19 through implementation of the Burrows-Wheeler Aligner35 
and processed through Picard36. The Firehose pipeline (http://www.broadin­
stitute.org/cancer/cga) was used to manage input and output files and submit 
analyses for execution. MuTect was used to identify somatic SSNVs in targeted 
exons by Bayesian statistical analysis of bases and their qualities in the tumor and 
normal BAMs at each given genomic locus; the MuTect publication describes 
the specificity and sensitivity of the method18. Reads from all SSNV candidates 
were then realigned more stringently by disregarding read-pair information to 
reduce alignment-based artifacts. All SSNVs were subjected to filtering against a 
large panel of normal samples in order to remove common artifacts that escaped 
the original calling algorithms37. Further, only sites within chromosomes 1–22 
and X were considered. Sites in the exomes of primary samples and metastasis 
were considered to be powered for mutation calling if the number of reads at 
a site allowed for a 0.9 probability of observing three supporting reads of the 
alternate allele, considering the purity of the sample and assuming a minimum 
cancer cell fraction of 0.1. Sites were considered powered in CTCs if five CTCs 
had coverage of more than three reads (this achieves ~98% power to detect a 
clonal mutation based on a maximum loss of coverage of 14.4% of the alternate 
allele only across the CTCs, as determined in Fig. 2a).
Calculation of false-positive rate. To calculate the effective false-positive rate of 
the method, we computed the total number of potential false-positive events and 
the territory at risk for these events. To calculate an upper bound for the number 
of events, we assumed that every event was a false positive after removing events 
seen independently in at least one of the primary tumor cores or metastasis. 
To calculate the denominator of the false-positive rate, or the number of bases 
that were at risk for a mistake being made, we considered the effects of biallelic 
dropout, as this leads to regions of the genome with no coverage and thus no 
possibility of a false positive occurring. Biallelic drop out was calculated from 
germline heterozygous single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) (Fig. 2b). We 
then used a binomial model to calculate the probability of having k or more 
observations in n CTCs using 1 minus the median value of the estimated frac­
tion of sites without biallelic dropout (0.33) as the probability of each CTC 
having coverage and multiplied by the approximate size of the original targeted 
exome territory (~32 Mb) to arrive at the total number of bases at risk.
RNA sequencing of single CTCs. Single CTCs were recovered using the 
nanowell-based isolation platform into individual wells of a 96-well plate con­
taining 10 µl of buffer TCL (Qiagen) supplemented with 1% 2-mercaptoethanol 
(Sigma), spun down, snap frozen on dry ice and stored at −80 °C until further 
processing. Next, RNA from each single CTC was isolated, reverse transcribed 
and amplified using the SMARTer Ultra-low RNA kit (Clontech) as previ­
ously described38. Afterwards, cDNA libraries were prepared using Nextera 
XT DNA Sample preparation reagents (Illumina) as per the manufacturer’s 
recommendations, with minor modifications. Specifically, reactions were run 
at one-fourth the recommended volume, the tagmentation step was extended 
to 10 min and the extension time during the PCR step was increased from 30 s 
to 60 s. After the PCR step, all 96 samples were pooled without library normali­
zation, cleaned twice with 0.9× AMPure XP SPRI beads (Beckman Coulter) 
and eluted in Tris-EDTA buffer, pH 8 (Teknova). The pooled libraries were 
quantified using the Quant-IT DNA High-Sensitivity Assay Kit (Invitrogen) 
and examined using a high-sensitivity DNA chip (Agilent). Finally, samples 
were sequenced using a MiSeq sequencer (Illumina).
Analysis of RNA sequencing data. Raw sequencing data were processed as 
described previously38 except that there was no need to trim SMARTer short 
and long adaptor sequences because of the Nextera library preparation39. Short 
sequencing reads were aligned to the UCSC hg19 transcriptome. These alignments 
were used to estimate transcriptomic alignment rates and were also used as input 
in RSEM v 1.12 (ref. 40) to quantify gene expression levels (transcripts per million) 
for all UCSC hg19 genes in all samples. Genomic mappings were performed with 
Tophat v. 1.41 (ref. 41), and the resulting alignments were used to calculate genomic 
mapping rates, ribosomal RNA contamination and 3′ and 5′ positional bias36.
Cell spike-in experiments. LNCaP prostate cancer cells (ATCC) were cultured 
in RPMI-1640 medium (Corning, Cellgro) supplemented with 10% FBS (Sigma). 
To determine surface expression of EpCAM, LNCaP cells were stained with PE-
conjugated antibodies to EpCAM (20 µl per 1 ml, BD Biosciences; clone EBA-1), 
and the level of expression was determined by flow cytometry on a LSRII 
(BD Biosciences) compared to unstained control. For technical validation of the 
MagSweeper enrichment procedure, LNCaP cells were labeled with carboxyfluo­
rescein diacetate succinimidyl ester (CFDA; Invitrogen) and spiked into normal 
blood (obtained from Research Blood Components, LLC) at the indicated concen­
trations before MagSweeper enrichment. Successful isolation of LNCaP cells was 
ascertained by determining the number of CFDA-labeled cells by microscopy.
31.	Oh, W.K. et al. Development of an integrated prostate cancer research information 
system. Clin. Genitourin. Cancer 5, 61–66 (2006).
32.	Love, J.C. et al. A microengraving method for rapid selection of single cells 
producing antigen-specific antibodies. Nat. Biotechnol. 24, 703–707 (2006).
33.	Fisher, S. et al. A scalable, fully automated process for construction of sequence-
ready human exome targeted capture libraries. Genome Biol. 12, R1 (2011).
34.	Stransky, N. et al. The mutational landscape of head and neck squamous cell 
carcinoma. Science 333, 1157–1160 (2011).
35.	Li, H. & Durbin, R. Fast and accurate long-read alignment with Burrows-Wheeler 
transform. Bioinformatics 26, 589–595 (2010).
36.	DePristo, M.A. et al. A framework for variation discovery and genotyping using 
next-generation DNA sequencing data. Nat. Genet. 43, 491–498 (2011).
37.	Lawrence, M.S. et al. Mutational heterogeneity in cancer and the search for new 
cancer-associated genes. Nature 499, 214–218 (2013).
38.	Shalek, A.K. et al. Single-cell transcriptomics reveals bimodality in expression and 
splicing in immune cells. Nature 498, 236–240 (2013).
39.	Ramsköld, D. et al. Full-length mRNA-Seq from single-cell levels of RNA and 
individual circulating tumor cells. Nat. Biotechnol. 30, 777–782 (2012).
40.	Li, B. & Dewey, C. RSEM: accurate transcript quantification from RNA-Seq data 
with or without a reference genome. BMC Bioinformatics 12, 323 (2011).
41.	Trapnell, C. et al. TopHat: discovering splice junctions with RNA-Seq. Bioinformatics 
25, 1105–1111 (2009).
npg
© 2014 Nature America, Inc. All rights reserved.
