Article
Pan-cancer proteogenomics connects oncogenic
drivers to functional states
Graphical abstract
Highlights
d Multi-omic clusters reveal shared oncogenic driver
pathways across ten cancer types
d Genetic changes correlate with altered, tumor-speciﬁc
protein-protein interactions
d cis/trans-effects and kinase activities show driver
heterogeneity and druggability
d Proteomic integration with genomic drivers resolves distinct
cancer hallmark patterns
Authors
Yize Li, Eduard Porta-Pardo,
Collin Tokheim, ..., Gad Getz, Li Ding,
Clinical Proteomic Tumor Analysis
Consortium
Correspondence
lewis_cantley@dfci.harvard.edu (L.C.C.),
gadgetz@broadinstitute.org (G.G.),
lding@wustl.edu (L.D.)
In brief
A multi-omics analysis-based resource
across ten cancer types from more than
1,000 patients provides pan-cancer
insights into shared oncogenic driver
mechanisms and pathways.
Li et al., 2023, Cell 186, 3921–3944
August 31, 2023 ª 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2023.07.014
ll

Article
Pan-cancer proteogenomics connects
oncogenic drivers to functional states
Yize Li,1,2,31 Eduard Porta-Pardo,3,4,31 Collin Tokheim,5,6,31 Matthew H. Bailey,7,31 Tomer M. Yaron,8,9,10,31
Vasileios Stathias,11,12,32 Yifat Geffen,13,14,32 Kathleen J. Imbach,3,4,32 Song Cao,1,2,32 Shankara Anand,13 Yo Akiyama,13
Wenke Liu,15,16 Matthew A. Wyczalkowski,1,2 Yizhe Song,1,2 Erik P. Storrs,1,2 Michael C. Wendl,2,17,18 Wubing Zhang,5
Mustafa Sibai,3,4 Victoria Ruiz-Serra,3,4 Wen-Wei Liang,1,2 Nadezhda V. Terekhanova,1,2 Fernanda Martins Rodrigues,1,2
Karl R. Clauser,13 David I. Heiman,13 Qing Zhang,13 Francois Aguet,13 Anna P. Calinawan,19 Saravana M. Dhanasekaran,20
Chet Birger,13 Shankha Satpathy,13 Daniel Cui Zhou,1,2 Liang-Bo Wang,1,2 Jessika Baral,1,2 Jared L. Johnson,8,9
Emily M. Huntsman,8,9 Pietro Pugliese,21 Antonio Colaprico,11,22 Antonio Iavarone,11,23 Milan G. Chheda,1,24,25
(Author list continued on next page)
SUMMARY
Cancer driver events refer to key genetic aberrations that drive oncogenesis; however, their exact molecular
mechanisms remain insufﬁciently understood. Here, our multi-omics pan-cancer analysis uncovers insights
into the impacts of cancer drivers by identifying their signiﬁcant cis-effects and distal trans-effects quantiﬁed
at the RNA, protein, and phosphoprotein levels. Salient observations include the association of point muta-
tions and copy-number alterations with the rewiring of protein interaction networks, and notably, most can-
cer genes converge toward similar molecular states denoted by sequence-based kinase activity proﬁles. A
correlation between predicted neoantigen burden and measured T cell inﬁltration suggests potential vulner-
abilities for immunotherapies. Patterns of cancer hallmarks vary by polygenic protein abundance ranging
from uniform to heterogeneous. Overall, our work demonstrates the value of comprehensive proteogenomics
in understanding the functional states of oncogenic drivers and their links to cancer development, surpassing
the limitations of studying individual cancer types.
INTRODUCTION
Cancer is primarily initiated by genetic driver mutations in tumor
suppressor genes (TSGs) and proto-oncogenes.1 Multiple met-
rics are considered to deﬁne a gene as a cancer driver, including
mutation recurrence in a gene,2 functional protein domains,3 in-
dividual amino acid hotspots for oncogenic mutations,4–6 enrich-
ment of damaging mutations,7 or three-dimensional clustering of
1Department of Medicine, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA
2McDonnell Genome Institute, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO 63108, USA
3Josep Carreras Leukaemia Research Institute (IJC), Badalona 08916, Spain
4Barcelona Supercomputing Center (BSC), Barcelona 08034, Spain
5Department of Data Science, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215, USA
6Department of Biostatistics, Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston, MA 02115, USA
7Department of Biology and Simmons Center for Cancer Research, Brigham Young University, Provo, UT 84602, USA
8Meyer Cancer Center, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY 10021, USA
9Department of Medicine, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY 10021, USA
10Englander Institute for Precision Medicine, Institute for Computational Biomedicine, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY 10021, USA
11Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL 33136, USA
12Department of Molecular and Cellular Pharmacology, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL 33136, USA
13Broad Institute of Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA
14Cancer Center and Department of Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA
15Institute for Systems Genetics, NYU Grossman School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016, USA
16Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, NYU Grossman School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016, USA
17Department of Genetics, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO 63130, USA
18Department of Mathematics, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO 63130, USA
19Department of Genetic and Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA
20Michigan Center for Translational Pathology, Department of Pathology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA
21Department of Science and Technology, University of Sannio, 82100 Benevento, Italy
(Afﬁliations continued on next page)
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Cell 186, 3921–3944, August 31, 2023 ª 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc.
3921
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

somatic mutations in the protein structure.8–10 On applying
these criteria to the large cohorts of cancer genomics data,
the list of cancer genes and their predicted driver mutations
has
grown
in
recent
years.1,2,11
How
these
mutations
mechanistically ‘‘drive’’ tumorigenesis remains incompletely
understood.12
The Clinical Proteomics Tumor Analysis Consortium (CPTAC)
has accelerated the understanding of basic molecular mecha-
nisms in cancer by integrating data across the proteogenomic
spectrum: whole-exome and whole-genome sequencing, DNA
methylation, RNA-seq, and comprehensive proteomics and phos-
phoproteomics.13–22 Todate, extensive data have been generated
for 1,000+ cases spanning ten cancer types: colorectal adenocar-
cinoma
(COAD),13
ovarian
high-grade
serous
carcinoma
(HGSC),20 clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC),14 head and
neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC),18 lung squamous cell
carcinoma (LSCC),22 uterine corpus endometrial carcinoma
(UCEC),15 lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD),17 pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma (PDAC),21 glioblastoma (GBM),16 and breast
carcinoma (BRCA).19 Through interrogation of alterations in
various omics layers, the effects of somatic driver mutations can
be tracked to the unit of biological structure and function: the
protein.
Pan-cancer studies focus on deﬁning molecular characteris-
tics across diverse cancers. Here, we extend our previous geno-
mics-centered pan-cancer studies1,23–26 by incorporating the
proteomic layer to elucidate six critical aspects of cancer drivers:
(1) pan-cancer genomic and epigenomic driver frequencies,
exclusivities, and co-occurrences; (2) the impact of driver alter-
ations on RNA, protein, and post-translational modiﬁcations
(PTMs); (3) the effects of driver alterations on protein complexes;
(4) essential protein- and phosphorylation-level changes in
oncogenic pathways; (5) association of actionable driver alter-
ations with the tumor microenvironment (TME); and (6) the com-
bined effects of somatic drivers on protein abundance through
the lens of cancer hallmarks. Our ﬁndings show the potential of
integrative proteogenomic analysis in decoding oncogenic
drivers and its potential clinical utility, particularly when a clear
genomic target is absent.
RESULTS
A pan-cancer proteogenomic landscape of driver
alterations and associated multi-omic clusters
Although large-scale DNA-sequencing studies have been vital in
identifying cancer driver mutations, proteogenomics further en-
hances epigenomic, transcriptomic, and proteomic data to
reveal functional consequences and therapeutic vulnerabilities.
As part of CPTAC, we uniformly processed and analyzed proteo-
genomic data from 1,064 prospectively collected cases across
ten cancer types, encompassing genetic alterations, DNA
methylation, transcriptome, global proteomics, and phospho-
proteomics (Figure 1A). Each case is accompanied by anony-
mized clinical data, histopathology, treatment outcome, and, in
some cases, detailed molecular data from normal-adjacent tis-
sues (NATs) (Table S1). A signiﬁcant advance is the inclusion of
mass-spectrometry-based proteomic and phosphoproteomic
data, which exponentially expands the number of quantiﬁed fea-
tures to 15,699 proteins and 110,274 phosphosites (Figure 1B),
compared with 128 and 53, respectively, evaluated in The Can-
cer Genome Atlas (TCGA)’s RPPA-based assays.27
To reveal the landscape of tumor variability in the tran-
scriptome, proteome, and phosphoproteome, we clustered
tumor samples by applying Bayesian non-negative matrix factor-
ization28–30 followed by hierarchical clustering. We resolved four
main multi-omic clusters (clusters A–D) (Figure 1C; STAR
Methods). Cluster A lacks PDAC but is enriched with HGSC
and COAD associated with a higher proportion of microsatellite
instability (MSI-high) and immune-cold samples (p values =
0.02, 1e5, respectively, chi-squared test; STAR Methods).
Cluster B has more squamous cell carcinomas and higher im-
mune inﬁltration than the other clusters (p value = 1e5, chi-
squared test). Clusters C and D are enriched in LUAD and
GBM, respectively, and share similarities, such as a higher pro-
portion of immune-warm samples (Figure 1C). Notably, some
oncogenic alterations preferentially occurred in particular clus-
ters (q value < 0.05, chi-squared test), such as KRAS mutations
in clusters C and D, and CDKN2A and TP53 mutations in cluster
B (Figure 1C; Table S1). Moreover, we identiﬁed differentially
Christopher J. Ricketts,26 David Fenyo¨ ,15,16 Samuel H. Payne,27 Henry Rodriguez,28 Ana I. Robles,28
Michael A. Gillette,13,30 Chandan Kumar-Sinha,20 Alexander J. Lazar,29 Lewis C. Cantley,8,9,* Gad Getz,13,14,30,* and
Li Ding1,2,17,24,33,* Clinical Proteomic Tumor Analysis Consortium
22Department of Public Health Sciences, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL 33136, USA
23Department of Neurological Surgery, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine,
Miami, FL 33136, USA
24Siteman Cancer Center, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO 63130, USA
25Department of Neurology, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO 63130, USA
26Urologic Oncology Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA
27Department of Biology, Brigham Young University, Provo, UT 84602, USA
28Ofﬁce of Cancer Clinical Proteomics Research, National Cancer Institute, Rockville, MD 20850, USA
29Departments of Pathology & Genomic Medicine, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA
30Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA
31These authors contributed equally
32These authors contributed equally
33Lead contact
*Correspondence: lewis_cantley@dfci.harvard.edu (L.C.C.), gadgetz@broadinstitute.org (G.G.), lding@wustl.edu (L.D.)
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2023.07.014
ll
OPEN ACCESS
3922
Cell 186, 3921–3944, August 31, 2023
Article

A
B
C
D
(legend on next page)
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Cell 186, 3921–3944, August 31, 2023
3923
Article

expressed proteins (DEPs) and phosphosites (DEPPs) (Fig-
ure 1C; Table S1). Functionally, cluster A-associated DEPs are
enriched in estrogen-dependent gene expression and DEPPs
in DNA repair. The DEPs and DEPPs in cluster B are enriched
in DNA replication, innate immune system, and cell cycle,
agreeing with the high number of CDKN2A alterations. Cluster
C-associated DEPs and DEPPs relate to signaling in extracellular
matrix (ECM) organization and VEGFA-VEGFR2. Finally, cluster
D is enriched in tyrosine metabolism and MAPK1/MAPK3
signaling (Figure 1C).
Next, we quantiﬁed how representative pathways enriched in
each multi-omic cluster varied by cancer type using protein-
based single-sample gene set enrichment analysis (ssGSEA)
(Figures 1D and S1A; Table S1). For example, ccRCC showed
higher ssGSEA scores for the immune system pathway than
GBM in each cluster (Figure S1A), consistent with a known higher
immune inﬁltration and better response rate of ccRCC to im-
mune checkpoint blockade.31 To evaluate the clinical relevance,
we conducted survival analyses among co-clustering tumors.
Following multiple test corrections, we found that ccRCC sam-
ples in clusters C and D labeled as group A (i.e., enriched with
PDAC samples) showed a superior prognosis to their counter-
parts (i.e., ccRCC samples in clusters A and B) (Figure S1B);
this relationship was maintained after adjusting for age, sex,
and tumor purity in a Cox proportional hazard model (p value =
0.008). By comparing the protein-based ssGSEA score of inﬂam-
matory response between groups A and B in ccRCC, we noticed
that group A corresponded to lower immune inﬁltration levels
(Figure S1C). A survival beneﬁt was noted when we grouped
the ccRCC samples based on their inﬂammatory response
ssGSEA score (Figure S1D). GBM scored higher than other can-
cer types for the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT)
pathway, especially in cluster D (Figure 1D). The mesenchymal
subtype of GBM expresses neural stem cell markers and is asso-
ciated with an aggressive phenotype.32–34 The subgroup of GBM
with high EMT ssGSEA scores was linked to poor patient survival
(p value = 0.0062; Figure S1E; STAR Methods). A holistic view of
all cancer cases, based on their multi-omic signatures, enabled
us to identify distinct sample clusters. However, how might the
cancer drivers in these samples be related to the molecular
pathway differences? We began by investigating the most
apparent possible effect: the impact of an altered driver gene
on its RNA and protein products.
Proteogenomic analyses reveal the heterogeneity of
cis-effects of cancer mutations
Although genetic variants can broadly impact the proteome, the
most proximal effect is at the transcriptional, translational, and
post-translational product of the mutated gene itself.35,36 To
explore such cis-effects, we assessed how putative cancer
driver gene mutations were associated with changes in their
RNA, protein, or phosphoprotein levels with linear regression
models (Figure 2A; Table S2; STAR Methods). We found 265 sig-
niﬁcant cis-events at the pan-cancer level in 59 cancer genes (q
value < 0.1, Figure 2B; Table S2). As expected, TSGs such as
ARID1A, MSH6, or RB1 tended to be downregulated at the
RNA, protein, or phosphoprotein level. Analyzed separately for
each tumor type, we found 349 cis-effects in 59 cancer genes
(q value < 0.1). Most overlapped with cis-effects from the pan-
cancer analysis. Still, some were unique, including mutations in
CUL3 in LSCC, NOTCH1 in HNSCC, and KMT2C in UCEC and
BRCA, all associated with lower protein abundance (Table S2).
Extending this analysis to paired NATs provided additional
insight into the dynamics of a subset of genes. Although the tu-
mor-focused analysis showed that somatic mutations in ARID1A
were associated with lower ARID1A protein abundance, NAT
characterization revealed that tumors lacking ARID1A muta-
tions, surprisingly, had higher ARID1A protein abundance than
NATs (p value = 1e16, Figures 2C and S2A). The reason for
these elevated ARID1A protein levels in tumor samples without
ARID1A mutations over matching NAT is unclear. Paired NATs
also permitted further scrutiny of STK11 cis-effects. STK11 mu-
tations in LUAD correlated with diminished protein abundance.
Wild-type (WT) STK11 tumors exhibited higher STK11 protein
abundance but had lower protein abundance than the matching
NATs (p value = 1e10, Figure 2D), suggesting that downregula-
tion of STK11 is also crucial for lung tumors lacking STK11 so-
matic mutations. Including NAT samples can contextualize
how cis-effects alter protein levels relative to WT tumors and pro-
tein abundance in corresponding normal tissues.
Although certain types of variants are expected to have a spe-
ciﬁc cis-impact on protein levels (e.g., nonsense and frameshift
indels), the consequences of other variants, like missense muta-
tions, can vary widely. To assess whether missense mutations
impact protein stability in cancer genes, we ﬁrst normalized
protein abundance by regressing out contributions from RNA
expression (STAR Methods). After repeating the cis-effect
analysis for putative oncogenic missense mutations, we found
11
pan-cancer
and
15
cohort-speciﬁc
signiﬁcant
events
(q value < 0.05, Figure 2E; Table S2). As anticipated,37 TP53
missense mutations were associated with higher protein abun-
dance, whereas frameshift indel and nonsense mutations were
associated with lower protein abundance (Figure 2F). For all
other TSGs with a cis-effect, oncogenic missense mutations
were associated with lower protein abundance, as seen in
STK11, PBRM1, and PTEN (Table S2). Consistent with an impact
on protein stability, these missense mutations preferentially
occurred at buried amino acids in the protein structure (p value =
Figure 1. The landscape of pan-cancer aberrations characterizes the four multi-omic clusters
(A) The overview of cohort and data types.
(B) Quantiﬁed features in proteogenomics data types and the number of H&E images.
(C) We classiﬁed the tumor samples in this pan-cancer cohort into four multi-omic hierarchical clusters. They presented tumor variabilities in proteogenomics
such as driver alterations (top), and the DEPs and DEPPs and enriched pathways associated with each cluster (middle and bottom).
(D) Violin plots showing the ssGSEA on the proteomic data in proliferation and EMT signaling pathways, grouped by multi-omic cluster. One-way ANOVA p values
are shown, and data are represented as mean ± CI.
See also Figure S1 and Table S1.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
3924
Cell 186, 3921–3944, August 31, 2023
Article

A
B
C
D
G
F
E
I
H
(legend on next page)
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Cell 186, 3921–3944, August 31, 2023
3925
Article

0.03, Figure 2G; Table S2). For example, PTEN showed a sub-
stantial bias for putative driver missense mutations at buried
amino acids (p value = 3e12, Figure 2H; Table S2), especially
for missense mutations computationally predicted as onco-
genic (Figure 2I). Based on previous saturation mutagenesis
screens,38,39 these computationally predicted oncogenic muta-
tions displayed low PTEN phosphatase activity like known onco-
genic mutations from OncoKB (Figure S2B). However, unlike
previously known oncogenic missense mutations, they exhibited
lower protein abundance (Figure S2C). Uniquely enabled by a
proteogenomics approach, these results highlight an underap-
preciated role of oncogenic missense mutations in lowering the
protein abundance of some tumor suppressors (Figure S2D).
Inference of altered protein-protein interactions
through protein co-variation analysis
Somatic mutations may modify protein-protein interactions
(PPIs).9,40
Although
PPIs
were
not
directly
measured
in
CPTAC, known protein interaction pairs were noted to display
high protein co-expression (Figure 3A).41 We found higher corre-
lation values for protein pairs that are indicated in larger numbers
of PPI databases. For example, in the BRCA cohort, random pro-
tein pairs showed an average Pearson correlation coefﬁcient of
0, compared with 0.23 for PPIs represented in three or more
databases (Figure 3B), such as those between MSH2 and
MSH6 (Figure S3A). We used signiﬁcant correlations between
protein levels as indirect evidence of PPIs (STAR Methods).
First, the correlation between protein pairs from well-estab-
lished PPIs was calculated involving at least one cancer gene
across the CPTAC cohort (STAR Methods; Figure 3C). This re-
vealed a set of conserved core PPIs, such as MSH2/MSH6,
CTNNA1/CTNNB1,
and RAD21/STAG1. Interestingly, most
PPIs involving cancer genes only correlated in a subset of co-
horts, suggesting tissue speciﬁcity. For instance, mTOR is
known to interact with both RICTOR and RPTOR,42 but we noted
a correlation of mTOR protein abundance with RICTOR but not
RPTOR in ccRCC, and the converse correlation with RPTOR
but not RICTOR in GBM (Figure 3D). Similarly, CTNNB1 and
CDH1 protein levels were seen to correlate in BRCA and
UCEC but not in ccRCC and HGSC (Figure S3B). These results
highlight the plasticity of PPIs across cancer types and the
importance of measuring protein levels alongside RNA.
Next, we extended the concept of protein co-expression as an
indicator of protein interactions to driver genes showing copy-
number alterations (CNAs). We found 32 known interactors of
driver genes signiﬁcantly differentially expressed (q value < 0.1)
relative to the CNA status of the driver gene (Figure 3E;
Table S3), including deletion of SMAD4 being associated with
reduced SMAD2 protein levels and CCNE1 ampliﬁcations asso-
ciated with increased CDK2. We performed a mediation analysis
to assess if the CNA-based trans-effect was indeed mediated
through the protein abundance of the driver gene and not an un-
related gene within the CNA (Figures 3F and S3C; STAR
Methods). We found that most PPI trans-effects (66%) were
associated
with
protein
abundance
of
the
driver
gene
(q value < 0.1, natural effect model; Table S3). For example,
copy-number ampliﬁcations in RICTOR are associated with
increased protein abundance of MAPKAP1 (Figure 3G) and
mTOR (Figure S3D) at the pan-cancer level, which could be de-
convolved into a cis-effect on RICTOR protein levels (Figure 3H)
and a trans-effect, irrespective of CNA status, between protein
levels of RICTOR and MAPKAP1/mTOR (Figures 3I and S3E).
Likewise, elevated CDK2 protein levels in CCNE1-ampliﬁed
tumors could be deconvolved into a cis-effect and trans-effect
(Figures S3F and S3G). At the phosphorylation-level, CCNE1-
ampliﬁed tumors also showed elevated activity of the CDK
protein sub-family containing CDK2 according to the Kinase
Library (Figure S3H), which provides additional corroboration
of our results.
Somatic mutations can change protein interactions by altering
the interaction interface between proteins. Using an interaction
term regression model (Figures S3I–S3K; STAR Methods), we
tested whether putative oncogenic mutations in driver genes
signiﬁcantly changed the co-variation between protein interac-
tors. In a pan-cancer analysis controlling for cancer type and tu-
mor purity, we found 51 signiﬁcant events (Figure 3J; Table S3)
Figure 2. cis-effects of SNVs in cancer genes across the CPTAC cohort
(A) An illustration visualizes the analysis structure for this ﬁgure. The effects of somatic mutations on RNA, protein, and phosphoproteomics were measured by
comparing mutated and wild-type samples.
(B) Overview of the different cis-effects analyzed in this manuscript at the pan-cancer (top) and cohort-speciﬁc levels (bottom). Heatmaps showing the cis-effects
for selected frequently mutated genes (x axis) at the RNA, protein, or phosphorylation levels (y axis) with effects measured at all three omics levels. Tiles are
colored according to signed log10(p) of the cis-effect from red (positive) to blue (negative). Signed log10(p): multiplying the direction of the coefﬁcient by the log10 of
the adjusted p value (capped at ± 10).
(C) Pan-cancer comparison of the ARID1A protein levels (y axis) in tumors with ARID1A mutations (red) or without them (black) and NAT (gray), depending on the
ARID1A mutation status (x axis).
(D) Comparison of the STK11 protein levels in LUAD patients (y axis) in tumors with STK11 mutations (red) or without them (black) and NAT (gray) depending on the
STK11 mutation status (x axis). One-way ANOVA p values are shown, and data are represented as median and interquartile range in (Figures 2C) and (D).
(E) Analysis of oncogenic missense mutations associated with a cis-effect on protein abundance after adjusting for RNA expression level, either at the pan-cancer
(top) or cohort-speciﬁc levels (bottom). Boxplots show tumor samples with a putative driver missense mutation (red) compared to wild-type tumor samples (gray).
Wilcoxon rank-sum test q values are shown, and data are represented as median and interquartile range.
(F) Pan-cancer cis-effects of different types of TP53 mutations (x axis) for TP53 protein abundance.
(G) Comparison of the relative solvent accessibility (RSA) for amino acid residues that have putative driver missense mutations for oncogenes (red) compared with
TSGs (blue). RSA scores whether an amino acid is exposed at the surface of a protein (high score) or is buried (low score).
(H) Comparison of RSA for amino acids in PTEN with a putative driver missense mutation compared with all remaining amino acids. Wilcoxon rank-sum test
p values are shown, and data are represented as median and interquartile range in (F)–(H).
(I) Protein structure showing the RSA for predicted oncogenic missense mutations in PTEN.
See also Figure S2 and Table S2.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
3926
Cell 186, 3921–3944, August 31, 2023
Article

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
L
M
N
(legend on next page)
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Cell 186, 3921–3944, August 31, 2023
3927
Article

affecting protein interactions. For example, oncogenic mutations
in CTNNB1 showed a substantially increased positive correlation
with LEF1 (Figure S3L), a known effector of WNT/b-catenin
pathway.43 Conversely, oncogenic mutations in PBRM1 abro-
gated the strong correlation of PBRM1 protein abundance with
ARID2 (Figure S3M), which is consistent with the known depen-
dence of PBRM1 protein stability on ARID2.44 Similarly, several
oncogenic point mutations in SMAD4 were associated with a
reduced correlation with SMAD2 (q value = 0.02; Figure 3K), sug-
gesting a possible loss of protein interaction. This hypothesis is
further supported by the localization of the missense mutations
in SMAD4 at the protein interface with SMAD2 (Figure 3L). Lastly,
oncogenic mutations in PPP2R1A, a scaffold protein for the
phosphatase 2A holoenzyme, abrogated the correlation with a
subset of regulatory subunits that control the speciﬁcity of the
phosphatase, including PPP2R2A, PPP2R5E, and PPP2R5B
(Figures 3M and S3N). The oncogenic missense mutations
were similarly located at the interface of PPP2R1A and the reg-
ulatory subunits (Figure 3N). Notably, these observations were
missed in RNA expression analysis, highlighting a unique advan-
tage of proteomics (Figure S3O).
Finally, we investigated the potential inﬂuence of phosphoryla-
tion levels on protein interactions. At the pan-cancer level, 39
PPIs involving a driver were strongly inﬂuenced by phosphoryla-
tion levels (p value < 0.001), whereas 59 PPIs were affected at the
cohort-speciﬁc level. Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
phosphorylation at T693, particularly in ccRCC, appears to inﬂu-
ence the correlation of EGFR and multiple protein partners (Fig-
ure S3P). 3D models of EGFR showed that T693 localizes at the
intracellular interface between EGFR dimers, and phosphoryla-
tion at this site negatively impacts EGFR dimer formation (Fig-
ure S3Q).45,46 Patients exhibiting high EGFR-T693 phosphoryla-
tion exhibit diminished correlations between EGFR protein and
downstream EGFR-binding partners (Figures S3P and S3R). In
conclusion, analyzing the impact of CNA, single-nucleotide var-
iants (SNVs), and phosphorylation on protein co-variation is a
potentially powerful method to understand interaction network
rewiring in cancer.
trans-effects of somatic mutations in cancer genes
across the CPTAC cohort
The impact of somatic mutations can extend beyond their own
protein product’s cis-effects or direct interactions. These more
distant trans-effects illuminate the far-reaching molecular pertur-
bations that can reverberate from driver gene alterations. The
aggregations of all trans-effects of a cancer gene can be consid-
ered its ‘‘molecular ﬁngerprint.’’ We hypothesized that these mo-
lecular ﬁngerprints could assess the similarity between different
pairs of mutated cancer genes and infer functional relationships
(Figure 4A). To identify these gene pairs, we calculated the cor-
relation between each driver gene’s proteomic and phosphopro-
teomic trans-effects signature with one another (Figure 4B;
STAR Methods). Although most driver similarity scores indicated
a slightly positive correlation (r > 0), a select few pairs exhibited
more extreme positive and negative scores (Figure 4B). The two
cancer genes with the most similar mutation trans-effects were
KEAP1 and NFE2L2. KEAP1 is known to bind and subsequently
mark the transcription factor NFE2L2 for degradation.47 The high
global correlation between all trans-effects attributed to these
proteins (r > 0.63, p value < 1e15, Figure 4C) suggests that
the overall cellular effect of mutations in either of these genes
is the same: the enhanced protein stability of NFE2L2 and the
consequent overexpression of its transcriptional targets. This
is consistent with the fact that mutations in these genes are
Figure 3. Inference of altered protein-protein interactions through protein co-variation analysis
(A) Conceptual diagram showing that known protein-protein interactions tend to have higher protein co-expression than those not known to interact.
(B) Violin plot indicating the Pearson correlation between protein-protein abundance as the number of databases supporting a protein-protein interaction in-
creases. Wilcoxon rank-sum test p values are shown. **p value < 0.01 and ***p value < 0.001. Data are represented as mean ± CI.
(C) Heatmap showing the correlation of protein abundance between cancer drivers and known protein interactors (x axis) across cancer types (y axis). Corre-
lations are colored by their signed log10 p value, with red indicating positive and blue indicating negative correlations.
(D) Scatterplots of examples that indicate the correlation between protein abundance of cancer drivers and protein interactors varies by cancer type (left, mTOR
and RPTOR; right, mTOR and RICTOR). Correlation test p values are shown.
(E) Volcano plot indicating proteins differentially expressed based on the presence of putatively oncogenic CNAs in cancer driver genes. Text labels indicate the
cancer driver on the left and the protein interactor on the right. The horizontal dashed line indicates the threshold for statistical signiﬁcance (q value < 0.1).
(F) Diagram indicating that a mediation analysis tries to identify whether the trans-effect (outcome, Y) of a CNA (exposure, X) is mediated through altered protein
abundance of the putative cancer driver gene (mediator, M).
(G) Boxplot indicating the upregulation of MAPKAP1 protein abundance in RICTOR-ampliﬁed tumors (trans-effect).
(H) Boxplot indicating the upregulation of RICTOR protein abundance in RICTOR-ampliﬁed tumors (cis-effect). The Wald test assesses statistical signiﬁcance and
represents data as median and interquartile range in (G) and (H).
(I) Scatterplot showing the correlation of RICTOR and MAPKAP1 protein levels in RICTOR wild-type tumor samples. The Wald test assesses statistical
signiﬁcance.
(J) Volcano plot indicating proteins with either increased or decreased association with a cancer driver when the tumor contains a putative oncogenic mutation.
(K) Scatterplot showing the correlation between SMAD2 and SMAD4 protein levels, stratiﬁed by whether the tumor has an oncogenic mutation in SMAD4.
Correlation test p values are shown.
(L) Protein structure (PDB: 1U7V) of SMAD4 (tan) in complex with SMAD2 (blue). Mutated amino acid residues that are putatively oncogenic are shown in a
spherical representation.
(M) Scatterplot showing the correlation between phosphatase 2A regulatory subunits (PPP2R2A and PPP2R5E) and PPP2R1A protein levels, stratiﬁed by
whether the tumor has an oncogenic mutation in PPp2R1A. Correlation test p values are shown. r represents the Pearson correlation coefﬁcient in (D), (I), (K),
and (M).
(N) Protein structure of the phosphatase 2A holoenzyme (PDB: 2NPP), consisting of PPP2R1A (yellow), PPP2CA (gray), and a regulatory subunit (purple). Mutated
amino acid residues that are putatively oncogenic are shown in a spherical representation.
See also Figure S3 and Table S3.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
3928
Cell 186, 3921–3944, August 31, 2023
Article

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
J
I
K
Figure 4. Trans-effects of somatic mutations in cancer genes across the CPTAC cohort
(A) Overview of how the similarity between trans-effects of driver genes was calculated based on proteomics and phosphoproteomics data from CPTAC.
(B) Histogram showing the distribution of Pearson r values of trans-scores (i.e., signed log10(p)) between all possible pairs of cancer genes in CPTAC (x axis).
(C) Scatterplot showing the trans-effects scores (i.e., signed log10(p)) for KEAP1 (y axis) and NFE2L2 (x axis).
(legend continued on next page)
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Cell 186, 3921–3944, August 31, 2023
3929
Article

mutually exclusive (Figure 4D). The strongest trans-effects of
both genes are the upregulation of NFE2L2 targets such as
AKR1C2 and AKR1C3 (Figure 4E).
Although most cancer genes showed positive correlations,
suggesting similar trans-effects, we also observed negative
correlations such as those between TP53/PTEN, TP53/CDH1,
EGFR/KRAS, and EGFR/STK11, with the last example having
the strongest negative correlation (r < 0.54, p value < 1e15,
Figure 4F). The EGFR/STK11 pair has several trans-effects that
are opposite depending on whether the cancer cell has an
EGFR or STK11 mutation, including several phosphorylation
sites such as TP53BP2 S704 and IRS2 S1100 (both increased
in STK11-mutated and decreased in EGFR-mutated samples)
or WIPF S155 and PTPN11 Y62 (increased in EGFR-mutated in-
stances and vice versa, Figure 4G). Furthermore, most of these
events are statistically signiﬁcant in both directions compared
with WT samples for both EGFR and STK11 (Figure 4G). Notably,
most of these effects were independent of the speciﬁc location
of the mutation within EGFR (Figure 4H). These results suggest
that EGFR and STK11 mutations could push normal cells into
opposite oncogenic states.
Next, we investigated the trans-effects of mutations on the
phosphorylation state of the cell at the pan-cancer level. We
compared the predicted kinase activities between mutated and
WT samples across all cancer types (Figures 4I and S4B;
Table S4). For example, mutations in both ACVR2A and TP53 ex-
hibited activation of cell cycle and splicing kinases; when
mutated, the well-known oncogene PIK3CA showed strong ac-
tivations of the PI3K/AKT pathway members S6Ks, RSKs,
PDK1, and SGK3; mutations in KRAS led to a signiﬁcant activa-
tion of its downstream extracellular signal-regulated kinases 1/2/
5/7 (ERK1/2/5/7) (Figure 4I). Interestingly, we found that the
CAMK2 kinases were inhibited in KRAS-mutated samples,
concordant with previous studies.48 In a pan-cancer analysis,
EGFR-mutated samples showed an inverse kinase activity
pattern to those of STK11- and KRAS-mutated samples
(Figure S4B).
Furthermore, we used the Kinase Library to determine the ac-
tivity state of different kinases in EGFR-mutated and STK11-
mutated LUAD samples. We found that most activated kinases
are from the CAMK and AGC families, whereas most inhibited
kinases are from the CMGC family in EGFR-mutated samples
(Figure 4J). In agreement with the observed negative correlation
for the overall trans-effects, an opposite pattern was observed
for both STK11-mutated and KRAS-mutated samples, where
the CMGC family dominated the activated kinases, and the in-
hibited kinases were primarily members of the CAMK and AGC
families (Figure 4J). Multiple kinases from different families
showed opposite activities between EGFR-mutated samples
and STK11-mutated/KRAS-mutated samples (Figures 4K and
S4C; Table S4). These data suggest that EGFR mutation and
STK11/KRAS mutations lead to distinct phosphorylation read-
outs in cancer cells. Our kinase enrichment analysis using sub-
strate motifs around phosphosites can capture underlying
mechanisms of driver mutations in cancer, informing treatment
strategies beyond genetic testing. This has implications for
basket clinical trial design and personalized oncology drug
repurposing.
Comparative analysis between tumor and normal-
adjacent tissue identiﬁes key protein changes for
oncogenic pathways
In contrast to other large-scale tumor characterization studies,
eight of the ten CPTAC cohorts included matched (similar cell
lineage) or unmatched (non-similar cell lineage) NATs (n = 556),
and the GBM study contained ten Genotype-Tissue Expression
(GTEx) project normal samples (Figure 5A). This allowed us to
investigate divergent expression patterns between tumors and
paired NATs. We found that tumors present distinct proteomic
and phosphoproteomic signatures compared with their homolo-
gous NATs, such as in ccRCC (Figure 5B; Table S5), and identi-
ﬁed 6,517 DEPs elevated in tumors and 7,030 DEPs elevated in
NATs within the pan-cancer cohort. Of these 6,517 DEPs, 3,070
were differentially expressed in R2 cancer types, and the rest in
a single cancer type. Among common DEPs, we found PLOD2,
UBE2C, and MARCKSL1 in all cancer types (Figure 5C;
Table S5). Notably, we observed that high PLOD2 protein abun-
dance was signiﬁcantly associated with worse overall survival in
ccRCC, LUAD, and PDAC, and a similar trend in patients with
GBM, HNSCC, and LSCC (Figure 5D). This suggests the poten-
tial value of PLOD2 as a pan-cancer prognostic biomarker.
To further investigate which cell types in the TME might
express
these
proteins,
we
used
single-nuclei
RNA-seq
(snRNA-seq) data and, based on correlation analysis with xCell
(D) Three-dimensional structure of the protein complex between KEAP1 and NFE2L2 (top, PDB 3WN7) and an oncoplot showing the CPTAC samples with al-
terations in these two genes.
(E) Boxplots showing the detailed protein levels (y axis) for each CPTAC sample of four proteins regulated by NFE2L2 (AKR1C2, AKR1C3, SRXN1, and AKR1B10)
stratiﬁed by mutation status of KEAP1 and NFE2L2 of the tumor (x axis).
(F) Scatterplot showing the trans-effects of STK11 mutations (y axis) or EGFR mutations (x axis) on all measured proteins and phosphoproteins. Correlation test p
values are shown, and r represents the Pearson correlation coefﬁcient in (A), (C), and (F).
(G) Boxplots showing the detailed protein levels (y axis) for each CPTAC sample of two phosphorylation events (PTPN11 pY62 and IRS2 pS1100) based on the
mutation status of EGFR and STK11 of the tumor (x axis).
(H) PTPN11 Y62 phosphorylation levels (y axis) in different CPTAC cohorts depending on the EGFR mutation status (x axis). Wilcoxon rank-sum test p values are
shown, and data are represented as median and interquartile range in (E), (G), and (H).
(I) Pan-cancer kinase activity in tumors with speciﬁc mutations based on the Kinase Library. For each kinase and condition, the bubble color (log2FF) indicates the
log2-ratio of the prediction frequency between the mutated tumors compared with WT tumors, and bubble size denotes the statistical signiﬁcance by Fisher’s
exact test.
(J) Protein family distribution of kinase activity inferred from the Kinase Library in LUAD.
(K) The Kinase Library analysis of kinase activity in EGFR-mutated, KRAS-mutated, and STK11-mutated LUAD tumors.
See also Figure S4 and Table S4.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
3930
Cell 186, 3921–3944, August 31, 2023
Article

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
(legend on next page)
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Cell 186, 3921–3944, August 31, 2023
3931
Article

and ESTIMATE signatures, classiﬁed the proteins into four
categories: tumor (T), immune (I), stromal (S), and mixed (M)
(Figures 5C and S5A; Table S5; STAR Methods). This allowed
us to evaluate the dysregulated signatures in TME at a higher
resolution. Pathway analysis of DEPs enriched in individual cat-
egories revealed that pathways of keratinization, EGFR, and
Warburg effect in the T subset; immune system and nonsense-
mediated mRNA decay (NMD) in the I subset; and ECM organi-
zation and collagen formation in the S subset, reﬂecting the
distinct characteristics of TME components (Table S5). Further-
more, we observed that MSI-high tumors showed signiﬁcantly
higher NMD pathway scores than microsatellite-stable (MSS) tu-
mors (Figures S5B and S5C). As reported, MSI COAD tumors ex-
pressed high levels of critical activators of the NMD system and
that inhibition of NMD in vivo using amlexanox reduced MSI tu-
mor growth.49 These results suggest that inhibition of the onco-
genic activity of NMD may provide an additional therapeutic
avenue for the personalized treatment of MSI tumors. Besides,
the protein-based cell-cycle ssGSEA score was signiﬁcantly
elevated in tumors relative to NATs in seven of eight cancer types
(Figure 5E). The difference was not signiﬁcant in UCEC, possibly
due to NATs of UCEC consisting mainly of the myometrium with
various levels of admixed endometrium or because these non-
tumor samples were derived from women at different stages of
their menstruation cycle (Figure 5A). Among cell-cycle pathway
proteins, we found 27 upregulated DEPs in multiple cancer types
(Figure 5E). Similarly, we detected a consistently enriched
pathway of transcriptional regulation by TP53 in tumors
compared with NATs across cancer types (Figure S5D). As for
the DEPs evaluated in speciﬁc cancer types, they contributed
to pathways such as the metabolism of lipids in UCEC and kera-
tinization in HNSCC (Figure S5E).
Finally, we used the Kinase Library to infer kinase activity pat-
terns in different cancers from our phosphoproteomics data (Fig-
ure 5F; STAR Methods). We ﬁrst applied protein- and RNA-based
pathway enrichment analysis to characterize shared or distinct
pathways across tissues. Interestingly, cell cycle and other repli-
cation-related pathways were enriched in most tumor types, pre-
dominantly only at the protein level (Figure 5G; Table S5). The
Kinase Library showed broad activation of multiple CDKs in
most tumor types, except ccRCC and PDAC (Figure 5H). Splicing
pathways were also predominantly observed at the protein level in
various tissues (Figure 5G), consistent with activated splicing ki-
nases in the corresponding tissues (Figure 5H). Furthermore, we
found agreement between kinase activity in distinct tissues and
their related enriched pathways at the protein level, such as the
PI3K-AKT-mTOR pathway was enriched only in ccRCC (Figure 5I;
Table S5). Moreover, we observed a potential feedback mecha-
nism for KRAS signaling in PDAC that was only evident at the
phosphorylation level, where upregulation of KRAS signaling
was associated with reduced activity of the ERK family protein ki-
nases. This insight may explain the reduced clinical efﬁcacy of
therapeutic agents in KRAS-mutated pancreatic tumors50 and
further emphasize the importance of proteomic and phosphopro-
teomic characterization of cancer (Figure S5F).
Impact of somatic mutations on immunogenic
neoantigens and druggable kinases
Given the relevance of neoantigens to immunotherapy,51 we sys-
tematically predicted neoantigens that bind to the patient-spe-
ciﬁc human leukocyte antigen (HLA) class I alleles (STAR
Methods). We found the expected positive correlation of neoan-
tigen burden with tumor mutation burden52 and higher neoanti-
gen burden noted in tumor samples with mutational signatures
of smoking and MSI (Figure 6A). The predicted neoantigen
burden normalized by mutational burden was higher for MSI-
high samples, likely due to a higher frequency of insertions and
deletions resulting in frameshifts (Figure S6A). Neoantigen
burden was positively correlated with inferred T cell inﬁltration
(p value = 4e4, cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL) score; p value =
0.002, CIBERSORTx CD8 T cells; Wald test) at the pan-cancer
level (Figure S6B). However, only cancer types that tended to
have a high baseline tumor mutation burden (COAD, UCEC,
LUAD, and BRCA) were nominally signiﬁcant by themselves,
suggesting
a
minimal
neoantigen
burden
threshold
for
immunogenicity.
To investigate the relationship between predicted neoantigen
burden and T cell inﬁltration in the context of speciﬁc driver mu-
tations, we employed an interaction term regression model
(STAR Methods). Oncogenic alterations in seven driver genes
were associated with a change in the correlation between neo-
antigen burden and inferred T cell inﬁltration, including KRAS
(q value < 0.1; Figure 6B; Table S6). Investigating the potential
correlation between neoantigen expression level and immuno-
genicity, we observed that a subset of genes that harbored a
high number of predicted neoantigens (R20) in MSI-high tumor
Figure 5. Analysis of normal-adjacent tissue identiﬁes key protein changes for oncogenic pathways
(A) The distribution of tumors and normal samples across cancer types.
(B) The schematic of the tumor and normal comparison is represented by selected H&E staining images of the tumor and normal pairs from ccRCC and UCEC
cohorts. The volcano plot shows such differentially expressed genes (DEGs) and differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) in ccRCC as an example.
(C) The distribution of DEP identiﬁed by tumor and NAT comparison. The pie chart indicates the distribution of cancer-type-speciﬁc DEPs and the rest.
(D) The plot shows that groups with higher PLOD2 protein abundance present increased risk in survival reﬂected by signiﬁcantly higher hazard ratios in multiple
cancer types. Cox proportional hazards model p values are shown. Whiskers represent ± 95% conﬁdence intervals of the hazard ratios.
(E) Cell-cycle protein-based ssGSEA scores are signiﬁcantly higher expressed in tumors than in NATs in seven of eight cancer types. Wilcoxon rank-sum test p
values are shown. ,p value > 0.05; ***p value < 0.001; and ****p value < 0.0001. Data are represented as mean ± CI.
(F) Workﬂow of phosphoproteomics analysis based on the Kinase Library to reveal distinct activity patterns of protein kinases in tumor and normal comparison
across cancer types.
(G) Pathway analysis (GSEA) at RNA and protein levels.
(H) The Kinase Library analysis for activated kinases in tumors compared with NAT (homologous or non-homologous) across multiple tissues.
(I) Pathway analysis (GSEA) and kinase activity analysis of tissue-speciﬁc trends.
See also Figure S5 and Table S5.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
3932
Cell 186, 3921–3944, August 31, 2023
Article

A
C
D
B
E
F
G
H
I
J
(legend on next page)
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Cell 186, 3921–3944, August 31, 2023
3933
Article

samples were also highly expressed at the protein level (protein
abundance > 1) (Figure 6C). The neoantigen burden in highly
expressed proteins vs. all proteins improved the correlation
with inferred T cell inﬁltration (q value = 0.03, likelihood ratio
test, Figure 6D) in COAD, where MSI is common. Notably, the
neoantigen burden for highly expressed transcripts vs. all tran-
scripts did not improve correlations (Figure S6B), highlighting
an advantage of proteomics.
Although copy-number ampliﬁcations for oncogenes were
associated with higher protein abundance than WT tumors, as
was expected (Figure S6C), they also showed higher variance
in protein abundance (p value = 0.006, Mann-Whitney U test, Fig-
ure S6D; Table S6). These ﬁndings extended to druggable tar-
gets (Figure 6E). EGFR- and ERBB2-ampliﬁed tumors had higher
protein abundance than their WT counterparts (p value = 4e16
and 5e9, respectively). However, there is still considerable
overlap in the distribution of protein abundance in cis (Figure 6E),
as the average precision for distinguishing ERBB2 and EGFR-
ampliﬁed from WT tumors is only 0.53 and 0.37 (of 1.0), respec-
tively. Protein abundance might provide additional information
beyond the genomic event alone for therapeutic decisions.
Because a limited number of oncogenes are directly targetable,
an analysis of the trans-effects of a CNA might further expand
potentially druggable targets. Using the Kinase Library, we
analyzed CNA events that might activate druggable kinases (Fig-
ure S6E). We found that multiple CNA events led to the activation
of CDKs (Figure 6F; Table S6), including the deletion of CDKN2A,
which has previous experimental and clinical support as a poten-
tial biomarker for CDK4/6i treatment.53–55 Beyond CDKN2A
deletion, we found additional CNA events within and outside
the core cell-cycle pathway associated with CDK activation
(Figures 6F and S6E). Tumors with oncogenic alterations for
RB1 were associated with marked upregulation of CDK2 at
both the RNA and protein levels (Figure 6G; Table S6), possibly
related to the loss of RB1 and its known role in transcriptional
repression (Figures S6F and S6G).56 In contrast, RB1-altered tu-
mors also showed substantial downregulation of CDK6 at both
the RNA and protein levels (Figure 6G). Thus, the signal of CDK
activation from the Kinase Library may reﬂect the activation of
distinct CDKs depending on the driver alteration.
To distinguish scenarios where CDK activation represents a
cancer dependency, we expanded our analysis of potential ther-
apeutic vulnerabilities by analyzing cell-line drug-response data
concerning the proteomic signatures of driver alterations,
including somatic mutations and CNAs. We calculated normal-
ized drug connectivity scores between proteomic signatures of
64 driver alterations and drug-response signatures (CMAP Li-
brary of Integrated Network-Based Cellular Signatures [LINCS]
database57) for compounds that are either FDA-approved or un-
der active clinical investigation (Figure 6H; Table S6; STAR
Methods). Interestingly, in agreement with the Kinase Library re-
sults (Figures 6F, S5C, and S6F), we found pan-cancer proteo-
mic signatures related to genes within and outside the cell-cycle
pathway to be associated with drug connectivity to multiple CDK
inhibitors (CDKi) (Figure 6H, top). These ﬁndings could also be
seen for tissue-speciﬁc signatures of driver alterations (Fig-
ure 6H, bottom).
In some cases, such as for RB1 deletions, strong CDK
activation was seen in the Kinase Library but a relatively lower
association with CDKi drug-response proﬁles (Figure 6I). This
may be related to a known role for RB1 mutations in primary
and acquired resistance to CDK4/6i, such as palbociclib.58,59
Consistent with this, examining CRISPR gene KO screens
(DepMap)60
showed
RB1
altered
cancer
cell
lines
were
less dependent on CDK4/6 but more dependent on CDK2
(q value < 0.1, Wald test; Figures 6J, S6H, and S6I; Table S6).
Although not included in CMAP, recently developed small
molecules selective for CDK261 could be more effective in
RB1-altered tumors. Cumulatively, most driver alterations that
showed CDK activation in the Kinase Library exhibited high
Figure 6. Immunogenicity and druggability analysis of somatic alterations
(A) Pearson correlation of the number of mutations in a tumor with neoantigen burden, stratiﬁed by mutational signatures (Smoking signature weights) or DNA
repair deﬁciency (POLE, POLE mutant; MMRD, mismatch repair deﬁcient).
(B) Pearson correlation of neoantigen burden and cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL) score stratiﬁed by driver mutation status of KRAS in LUAD. Wald test p value
is shown.
(C) Scatterplot indicating genes with more predicted neoantigens simultaneously present in highly expressed proteins. Dashed lines indicate > 1 protein
abundance (y axis) and > 20 neoantigens (x axis).
(D) Heatmap showing Spearman’s correlation of CTL score with neoantigen burden using different subsets of proteins based on protein abundance.
(E) Boxplot indicating the cis-effect of CNAs on protein levels for two druggable targets. Wilcoxon rank-sum test p values are shown, and data are represented as
median and interquartile range.
(F) Kinase activity for different CNAs at the pan-cancer level. For each kinase and condition, the color of the bubble (log2FF) indicates the log2-ratio of the
prediction frequency for that kinase between the tumors with the CNA compared to the WT tumors, and the size of the bubble denotes the statistical signiﬁcance
by Fisher’s exact test.
(G) Top, volcano plot showing the DEGs of tumors containing oncogenic RB1-alterations. Green dots indicate cell-cycle-related genes (CDK1-6). Bottom,
heatmap showing the differential expression at the RNA and protein level for cell-cycle related genes (Wald test). Positive t statistic (red) indicates upregulation;
negative t statistic (blue) indicates downregulation.
(H) Heatmap showing the normalized drug connectivity scores between protein abundance signatures (derived from driver alterations) and the drug-response
signatures from the CMAP LINCS 2020 dataset. Negative connectivity scores (blue) indicate the predicted sensitivity of a signature to a particular drug.
(I) Average drug connectivity between seven CDK inhibitors used in the L1000 assay and pan-cancer (top) and cancer-speciﬁc (bottom) driver alteration sig-
natures. CDK activation status was inferred using the Kinase Library.
(J) Top, boxplots showing cancer cell-line dependencies for two genes (CDK2 and CDK6) from CRISPR KO screens (DepMap) depending on the presence of
pLOF mutation in the RB1 gene. Wilcoxon rank-sum test p values are shown, and data are represented as median and interquartile range. Bottom, heatmap
showing the differential gene dependencies (t statistic, Wald test) for cell-cycle-related genes (CDK1-6).
See also Figure S6 and Table S6.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
3934
Cell 186, 3921–3944, August 31, 2023
Article

A
B
F
C
G
D
E
H
I
(legend on next page)
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Cell 186, 3921–3944, August 31, 2023
3935
Article

(negative) drug connectivity to CDKi by using independent
proteomic
signatures
(Figure
6I).
These
results
suggest
the
potential
therapeutic
beneﬁts
of
CDKi
for
treating
tumors harboring genomic alterations (MCL1 or ERBB2 ampliﬁ-
cation) that are not necessarily directly linked to the cell-cycle
pathway.
Integrative multi-genomic scoring provides evidence on
how somatic alterations alter cancer hallmarks
Individual gene alteration can impact the proteomic landscape in
cis, trans, and mediator settings. However, we wished to explore
the global effect of all somatic mutations on the overall protein
variability within cancer types. To address this question, we built
a combined polygenetic protein abundance prediction algorithm
for oncology, called C3PO, as a theoretical exercise. This tool
applies polygenic mathematics to describe protein variability
instead of disease status, like polygenic risk scores (PRS).62–64
To calculate a polygenic predictor, one measures changes in
protein abundance in the altered or unaltered state (Figure S7A).
The effect sizes can be summed across multiple alterations to
produce a polygenic risk score based on which alterations are
present. Typical applications of PRS generate effect sizes by
comparing mutated samples to non-mutated samples for a
phenotype of interest. However, because of the large number
of infrequently mutated driver genes in cancer (Figure S1E),
we aggregated mutations into NeSTed protein systems65
(Table S7; STAR Methods). Doing so provided broader coverage
of the possible mutational impacts on protein. Results from
C3PO suggest that somatic mutations and copy-number events
alone account for, on average, 7.2%–27.5% (range 0%– 91.9%)
of the protein abundance variability across these ten cancer
types (Figures S7B and S7C). When applied to an orthogonal da-
taset, C3PO could only collectively account for 0.7%–2.6% of
global protein variability in HGSC (Figures S7D and S7E; 1.5%
CNA ampliﬁcation, 1.5% CNA deletion, and 0.8% somatic
mutations, range 0%–19%),20 BRCA (2.0% CNA ampliﬁcation,
2.0% CNA deletion, and 2.3% somatic mutations, range
0%–31.2%),19 and COAD (2.2% CNA ampliﬁcation, 2.0% CNA
deletion, and 2.6% somatic mutation, range 0%–38.8%).13
Further analysis of our correlations showed that combining sub-
strate scores improved predictions (Figures S7F and S7G). This
average range (0.7%–27.5%) represents a cumulative ceiling
(overﬁt) and ﬂoor (unoptimized) of our tool and suggests the
need for proteomic measures to understand the consequences
of mutational events better.
Although it may be difﬁcult to predict individual proteins,
consistent changes across many proteins in a pathway might
reveal biologically meaningful results. To illustrate this, we
aggregated C3PO scores across cancer hallmark genes66,67
(Figures 7A, 7B, and S7I; Table S7; STAR Methods). C3PO
was designed to assess variability between tumors. Hence, in-
stances where nearly all tumors show pathway dysregulation,
such as 95% of PDACs being KRAS mutants, are not expected
to be captured in this analysis. We explored hallmark variability
between cancer types contributed by genomic variants by as-
sessing entropy among the top three hallmark scores produced
by C3PO for each sample (Figure 7C). From these predictions,
we found certain cancer types showed lower hallmark variability
(Figure 7D) than others (Figure 7E). For example, in LUAD, C3PO
hallmark scores for adaptive immunity and DNA repair were
consistently high, with enrichment of higher smoking scores68
in the chromatin modiﬁcation pathway (p value = 3.8 3 107,
chi-squared test) (Figure 7D; STAR Methods). In contrast,
UCEC had substantially more heterogeneity for top hallmarks
in each sample (Figure 7E), including DNA repair and pathways,
such as NOTCH, not seen in LUAD. Thus, our current systematic
understanding of genomics data can capture at least some vari-
ability in the protein levels of cancer hallmarks.
In addition to hallmark scores produced by C3PO, we used
an established pathway enrichment tool, ssGSEA, to identify
enrichment directly from protein abundance69 (Figures 7A and
7F; Table S7; STAR Methods). We observed higher pathway vari-
ability in the top hallmarks per sample (Figure 7G). Similar hall-
mark uniformity was observed across all LUAD for DNA repair,
cell cycle and apoptosis, and cancer drivers shared with
C3PO, but many other hallmarks displayed much higher diversity
(Figure S7H). Similarly, DNA repair, cell cycle and apoptosis,
chromatin modiﬁcation, and cancer driver hallmarks clustered
together for C3PO and ssGSEA, but ssGSEA more diversely rep-
resented the remaining hallmarks. Upon further analysis, both
LUAD (Figure 7H) and UCEC (Figure 7I) contained subgroups
of samples with higher EMT and ECM activity—a hallmark not
typically associated with known driver events (n = 19 and
n = 21, respectively). The proteins most differentially expressed
within these subgroups were VPS13A, FSTL1, and TMEM30B for
UCEC (p values = 5.1 3 107, 2.6 3 105, and 6.3 3 105,
Figure 7. C3PO tool to investigate the multi-genomic impact on cancer endophenotypes
(A) Overview of C3PO. Left indicates the theoretical contribution of genomic alterations to protein levels (CNA and mutations); right provides a protein-only
perspective of cancer hallmarks.
(B) Circos plot shows 21 cancer hallmark pathways. Icons indicate relationships to the original hallmarks outlined by Hanahan and Weinberg.66,67 Every sample in
CPTAC is represented by the links connecting hallmarks and is colored according to cancer type. Each sample is displayed using three lines according to their top
three hallmark activity scores generated by C3PO. The histogram indicates the distribution of C3PO hallmark scores.
(C) Diversity among the top three hallmarks for each cancer type was quantiﬁed using Shannon entropy. Each bar shows the ranked hallmark entropy for the top
three hallmarks in each sample and cancer type. Cancers are ordered by the lowest entropy measures of their sample’s top hallmarks.
(D) Heatmap displays LUAD samples and their C3PO hallmark scores for each of the 21 hallmarks. Rows and columns are ordered using unsupervised clustering.
Bottom annotations include neoantigen count estimation, total mutation counts, and smoking scores.
(E) Similar to Figure 7D, displays UCEC samples.
(F) Similar to Figure 7B, each sample is displayed with one line that links their top two hallmark scores produced by ssGSEA.
(G) Similar to Figure 7C, Shannon entropy calculations were made on ssGSEA scores.
(H–I) Similar to Figures 7D and 7E but show scores generated by ssGSEA.
See also Figure S7 and Table S7.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
3936
Cell 186, 3921–3944, August 31, 2023
Article

respectively; two-sided t test) and SLPI, TSPAN1, and CALD1 for
LUAD (p values = 1.6 3 105, 2.6 3 105, and 4.4 3 105,
respectively; two-sided t test). This result, speciﬁc to our pro-
tein-only analysis from ssGSEA, implies that protein variability
within tumors can reﬂect the aggregation of different alterations
at the DNA, RNA, and protein levels. These can yield similar
downstream effects and be independent of somatic alterations,
possibly due to extracellular or microenvironment interactions.
These ﬁndings complement genomics and highlight the proteo-
mic contribution to tumor phenotype characterization.
DISCUSSION
Discovery and functional characterization of oncogenic drivers,
accelerated
by
high-throughput
genomic
analyses,
have
advanced our mechanistic understanding of carcinogenesis,
leading to more effective therapies.25 Initially, targeted therapies
were restricted to speciﬁc tumor types. However, the discovery
of shared, therapeutically actionable drivers across different
cancers has led to FDA drug approvals that are tumor-type
agnostic. Subsequently, the FDA has approved the testing of
broad gene panels to reveal clinically actionable variants,70
where speciﬁc alterations are matched with targeted thera-
pies.71,72 These developments have spurred analyses of molec-
ular underpinnings of pan-cancer drivers. TCGA pan-cancer
atlas73 represents an initial framework for integrating molecular
genomic data from multiple tumor types, providing novel in-
sights.74–76 This also highlighted the need to expand the charac-
terization of functional, mechanistic, and phenotypic correlates
of driver alterations across additional layers of molecular data.
Here, weusedproteomic and phosphoproteomicreadoutsfrom
ten cancer types, integrated with genomic and transcriptomic
data, to assess the pan-cancer consequences of 5,443 putative
driver alterations across the CPTAC cohort. Our proteogenomic
analyses provide insights into the molecular mechanisms of onco-
genic mutations, from individual proteins to cancer hallmarks,
revealing potentially novel therapeutic avenues. To precisely
dissect how the cancer proteome is shaped, we analyzed the
impact of oncogenic variants across different layers of biological
regulation, starting with the effect on the same protein (cis-effect),
moving to protein interactions and complexes, leading up to the
entire (phospho-)proteome including trans-effects and polygenic
predictive framework. To assess the rewiring of protein-protein in-
teractions (PPI) in cancer,40,77 we used proteomic co-expression
data as an indirect readout of PPIs. We found candidate PPIs
that differ by cancer type or driver alterations. Interestingly, many
drivers were noted to display driver alterations at the interface be-
tween known interacting proteins, including PIK3R1-PIK3CA,
SMAD4-SMAD2, and PPP2R1A-PPP2R2A. Importantly, similar
analysis with the RNA data yielded only a subset of the PPI effects
detected at the protein level, highlighting the importance of prote-
omic analysis. Given the emerging role of network medicine,78 we
trust that our use of pan-cancer proteomics data to associate mu-
tations with the PPI network indirectly will be enlightening.
Our use of trans-effects of driver events revealed that different
cancer genes in a pathway tend todisplay similar molecular ﬁnger-
prints. This suggests that their molecular effects are similar, for
example, NFE2L2 and KEAP1, and KMT2B and CREBBP. Such
molecular convergence explains the mutual exclusivity of a signif-
icant fraction of oncogenic drivers. However, we also found some
cases where the molecular ﬁngerprints are negatively correlated,
and these often overlapped with mutually exclusive driver genes
such as EGFR and STK11, CDH1 and TP53, or EGFR and
KRAS. It is conceivable that these pairs of genes are mutually
exclusive because a mutation in one gene moves the cell toward
a state where a mutation in the second gene is incompatible with
oncogenesis (among other possible explanations). These genes
(EGFR and STK11) are divergently incompatible rather than onco-
genically convergent and redundant. These divergent incompati-
bilities could represent synthetic lethal vulnerabilities, as shown
for EGFR and KRAS in lung cancer.79 Drugs that exploit this phe-
nomenon by activating genes divergently incompatible could be
contemplated. Thus, the results from the Kinase Library, showing
how EGFR-mutated and STK11/KRAS-mutated tumors activate
opposite sets of kinases, could provide such drug targets.
To examine the cumulative impact of tumor genomic variants
on the proteome, we built C3PO, a polygenic predictive frame-
work trained to predict protein abundance. The predictive
capacity is currently limited to 27% of the global proteomic
landscape, likely due to cellular plasticity80 and transcriptomic
ﬂuctuations caused by the TME.81 Nevertheless, this tool en-
ables assessment of the genomic contribution to protein hall-
mark variability in tumors across space and time.82
In summary, this study highlights critical insights provided by
proteomics to systematically assess the consequences of onco-
genic drivers on the functional states of cancers. Going forward,
a broader characterization of PTMs and the metabolome could
further reveal how driver alterations perturb the activity of pro-
teins such as E3 ubiquitin ligases. Furthermore, by applying sin-
gle-cell proteomics,83–85 spatial proteomics,86 and multiple
intra-/inter-tumor samples per patient, the proteomic contribu-
tions to tumor heterogeneity and interaction with the TME could
be elucidated more comprehensively. Finally, clinical trials that
couple proteomics to both pre- and post-treatment samples
could reveal determinants of response and resistance to thera-
pies and inform combination treatments at a level more directly
related to the action of drugs: the proteome. This could lead to
clinically implementable proteogenomic panels. Our ﬁndings
support the proteome as a missing link between the genotype
of oncogenic drivers and their functional states.
Limitations of the study
The pan-cancer proteogenomics study comprised ten tumor
types previously analyzed individually as part of CPTAC con-
sortium ﬂagship studies.13–22 This cohort is highly disparate,
including three female-speciﬁc cancers, BRCA, HGSC, and
UCEC,butnotthemostcommonmalecancer,prostateadenocar-
cinoma. Also, GBM represents a relatively less common and bio-
logically more distinct tumor type than the rest of the cohort. Addi-
tional planned cohorts will ameliorate these limitations of cohort
composition. Some of the tumors in this study have cognate
NAT composed of a cell lineage closely related to that of cancer.
For others, this was unavailable. The pan-cancer analysis of
drug sensitivity seems to focus on cell-cycle-related proteins,
motivated in considerable measure by the interest in the commu-
nity to target this core hallmark of cancer therapeutically. Although
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Cell 186, 3921–3944, August 31, 2023
3937
Article

ﬁnding that a kinase has elevated activity in tumors might suggest
a potential drug target, careful consideration of the essentiality of
that kinase in normal tissues is needed to establish a possible ther-
apeutic window. Nevertheless, a pan-cancer proteomic readout of
other hallmark phenotypes may yet be therapeutically informative
and would merit in-depth assessment in future studies.
CONSORTIA
The members of the National Cancer Institute Clinical Proteomic
Tumor Analysis Consortium for pan-cancer are Franc¸ ois Aguet,
Yo Akiyama, Eunkyung An, Shankara Anand, Meenakshi Anurag,
O¨ zgu¨ n Babur, Jasmin Bavarva, Chet Birger, Michael J. Birrer,
Anna Calinawan, Lewis C. Cantley, Song Cao, Steven A. Carr,
Michele Ceccarelli, Daniel W. Chan, Arul M. Chinnaiyan, Hanbyul
Cho, Shrabanti Chowdhury, Marcin P. Cieslik, Karl R. Clauser,
Antonio Colaprico, Daniel Cui Zhou, Felipe da Veiga Leprevost,
Corbin Day, Saravana M. Dhanasekaran, Li Ding, Marcin J. Do-
magalski, Yongchao Dou, Brian J. Druker, Nathan Edwards,
Matthew J. Ellis, Myvizhi Esai Selvan, David Fenyo¨ , Steven M.
Foltz, Alicia Francis, Yifat Geffen, Gad Getz, Michael A. Gillette,
Tania J. Gonzalez Robles, Sara J.C. Gosline, Zeynep H. Gu¨ mu¨ sx,
David I. Heiman, Tara Hiltke, Runyu Hong, Galen Hostetter,
Yingwei Hu, Chen Huang, Emily Huntsman, Antonio Iavarone,
Eric J. Jaehnig, Scott D. Jewell, Jiayi Ji, Wen Jiang, Jared L.
Johnson, Lizabeth Katsnelson, Karen A. Ketchum, Iga Kolod-
ziejczak, Karsten Krug, Chandan Kumar-Sinha, Alexander J.
Lazar, Jonathan T. Lei, Yize Li, Wen-Wei Liang, Yuxing Liao,
Caleb M. Lindgren, Tao Liu, Wenke Liu, Weiping Ma, D.R.
Mani, Fernanda Martins Rodrigues, Wilson McKerrow, Mehdi
Mesri, Alexey I. Nesvizhskii, Chelsea J. Newton, Robert Oldroyd,
Gilbert S. Omenn, Amanda G. Paulovich, Samuel H. Payne,
Francesca Petralia, Pietro Pugliese, Boris Reva, Ana I. Robles,
Karin D. Rodland, Henry Rodriguez, Kelly V. Ruggles, Dmitry
Rykunov, Shankha Satpathy, Sara R. Savage, Eric E. Schadt,
Michael Schnaubelt, Tobias Schraink, Stephan Schu¨ rer, Zhiao
Shi, Richard D. Smith, Xiaoyu Song, Yizhe Song, Vasileios Sta-
thias, Erik P. Storrs, Jimin Tan, Nadezhda V. Terekhanova, Ratna
R. Thangudu, Mathangi Thiagarajan, Nicole Tignor, Joshua M.
Wang, Liang-Bo Wang, Pei Wang, Ying Wang, Bo Wen, Maciej
Wiznerowicz, Yige Wu, Matthew A. Wyczalkowski, Lijun Yao,
Tomer M. Yaron, Xinpei Yi, Bing Zhang, Hui Zhang, Qing Zhang,
Xu Zhang, and Zhen Zhang.
STAR+METHODS
Detailed methods are provided in the online version of this paper
and include the following:
d KEY RESOURCES TABLE
d RESOURCE AVAILABILITY
B Lead contact
B Materials availability
B Data and code availability
d EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS
B Human subjects
B Clinical data annotation
d METHOD DETAILS
B Harmonized genome alignment
B Somatic mutation calling
B Germline variant calling and pathogenicity classiﬁcation
B Copy number variant calling
B DNA methylation microarray processing
B RNA data processing and quantiﬁcation
B RNA fusion detection
B Cell-type annotation on differentially expressed markers
B Tumor microenvironment inference
B Cell type enrichment deconvolution using gene
expression
B Survival analysis
B Ancestry prediction using SNPs from 1000 genomes
project
B MSI prediction
B HLA typing and neoantigen prediction
B Oncogenicity annotation
B Normalization of protein abundance by RNA expression
B Calculation of relative solvent accessibility of amino
acid residues
B Protein-protein interaction databases
B Driver mutation interaction term regression model for
protein-protein interactions
B Robustness and subsampling analysis of the interaction
term regression model for protein-protein interactions
B Copy number mediation analysis
B Phosphorylation interaction term regression model for
protein-protein interactions
B Regression analysis of neoantigens and inferred im-
mune inﬁltration
B Analysis of RB1 oncogenic alterations
B Drug connectivity
B Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) on signature
gene coefﬁcients
B The Kinase Library enrichment analysis
B Genetic driver alterations’ cis impact on RNA, prote-
ome, and PTMs
B Similarity of drivers through trans-effects on proteome
and PTMs
B Multi-omic signatures and clusterings
B C3PO
B Proteomics data processing
d QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
B RNA and protein quantiﬁcation
B Gene expression, proteomic, and phosphoproteomic
feature-associated markers
B Statistical power analysis of driver gene discovery
d ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.
2023.07.014.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the National Cancer Institute (NCI) Clinical Proteo-
mic Tumor Analysis Consortium (CPTAC) under award numbers U24CA210955,
U24CA210985, U24CA210986, U24CA210954, U24CA210967, U24CA210972,
ll
OPEN ACCESS
3938
Cell 186, 3921–3944, August 31, 2023
Article

U24CA210979,
U24CA210993,
U01CA214114,
U01CA214116,
and
U01CA214125 as U24CA210972 (D.F., L.D., and S.H.P.), U24CA210979
(G.G. and C.B.), and U24CA270823 (S.S. and M.A.G.), and Contract
GR0012005 (L.D.). M.S. is supported by the Asociacio´ n Espan˜ ola Contra
el Ca´ ncer (AECC) project LABAE20038PORT. E.P.-P., V.R.-S., and K.J.I.
are supported by the Spanish Ministry of Science (grants RYC2019-
026415-I and PID2019-107043RA-I00).
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Study conception and design, Y.L., C.K.-S., A.J.L., L.C.C., G.G., and L.D.; per-
formed experiment or data collection, Y.L., Y.G., S.A., M.A.W., Y.S., W.-W.L.,
N.V.T., F.M.R., K.R.C., D.I.H., Q.Z., F.A., C.B., D.C.Z., and L.-B.W.; computa-
tional, multi-omic, and statistical analyses, Y.L., E.P.-P., C.T., M.H.B., T.M.Y.,
V.S., K.J.I., Y.G., S.C., S.A., Y.A., W.L., E.P.S., M.C.W., W.Z., M.S., V.R.-S.,
J.L.J., E.M.H., P.P., and A.J.L.; data interpretation and biological analysis,
Y.L., E.P.-P., C.T., M.H.B., T.M.Y., Y.G., V.S., K.J.I., S.C., S.A., Y.A., W.L.,
E.P.S., M.C.W., W.Z., M.S., V.R.-S., J.L.J., E.M.H., P.P., C.K.-S., A.J.L.,
L.C.C., G.G., and L.D.; data visualization and ﬁgure design: Y.L., E.P-P.,
C.T., M.H.B., T.M.Y., V.S., K.J.I., S.C., M.A.W., C.K.-S., A.J.L., L.C.C., G.G.,
and L.D; writing – original drafts, Y.L., E.P.-P., C.T., M.H.B., T.M.Y., V.S.,
K.J.I., S.C., C.K.-S., A.J.L., and L.D.; writing – review and editing, Y.L.,
E.P.-P., C.T., M.H.B., T.M.Y., V.S., Y.G., K.J.I., S.C., M.C.W., S.M.D., S.S.,
J.B., A.C., A.I., M.C., C.J.R., D.F., S.H.P., A.I.R., M.A.G., C.K.-S., A.J.L.,
L.C.C., G.G., and L.D.; supervision: Y.L., A.I.R., C.K.-S., A.J.L., L.C.C., G.G.,
and L.D.; and administration, Y.L., H.R., A.I.R., G.G., and L.D.
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
Y.G. is a consultant for Oriel Research Therapeutics. T.M.Y. is a co-founder,
stockholder, and member of the board of directors of DESTROKE, Inc., an
early-stage start-up developing mobile technology for automated clinical
stroke detection. J.L.J. has received consulting fees from Scorpion Therapeu-
tics and Volastra Therapeutics. F.A. is an inventor on a patent application
related to SignatureAnalyzer-GPU and has been an employee of Illumina,
Inc., since 8 November 2021. L.C.C. is a founder and member of the board
of directors of Agios Pharmaceuticals and is a founder of Petra Pharmaceuti-
cals. L.C.C. is an inventor on patents (pending) for Combination Therapy for
PI3K-associated Disease or Disorder, and The Identiﬁcation of Therapeutic In-
terventions to Improve Response to PI3K Inhibitors for Cancer Treatment.
L.C.C. is a co-founder and shareholder in Faeth Therapeutics. G.G. receives
research funds from IBM, Pharmacyclics, and Ultima Genomics and is also
an inventor on patent applications ﬁled by the Broad Institute related to
MSMuTect, MSMutSig, POLYSOLVER, SignatureAnalyzer-GPU, MSIDetect,
and MinimuMM-Seq. G.G. is also a founder, consultant, and privately held eq-
uity in Scorpion Therapeutics.
Received: July 5, 2022
Revised: December 30, 2022
Accepted: July 10, 2023
Published: August 14, 2023
REFERENCES
1. Bailey, M.H., Tokheim, C., Porta-Pardo, E., Sengupta, S., Bertrand, D.,
Weerasinghe, A., Colaprico, A., Wendl, M.C., Kim, J., Reardon, B.,
et al. (2018). Comprehensive characterization of cancer driver genes
and mutations. Cell 173, 371–385.e18. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.
2018.02.060.
2. Lawrence, M.S., Stojanov, P., Polak, P., Kryukov, G.V., Cibulskis, K., Si-
vachenko, A., Carter, S.L., Stewart, C., Mermel, C.H., Roberts, S.A., et al.
(2013). Mutational heterogeneity in cancer and the search for new can-
cer-associated genes. Nature 499, 214–218. https://doi.org/10.1038/
nature12213.
3. Porta-Pardo, E., and Godzik, A. (2014). e-Driver: a novel method to iden-
tify protein regions driving cancer. Bioinformatics 30, 3109–3114. https://
doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btu499.
4. Tokheim, C., and Karchin, R. (2019). CHASMplus reveals the scope of
somatic missense mutations driving human cancers. Cell Syst. 9, 9–
23.e8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cels.2019.05.005.
5. Muin˜ os, F., Martı´nez-Jime´ nez, F., Pich, O., Gonzalez-Perez, A., and Lo-
pez-Bigas, N. (2021). In silico saturation mutagenesis of cancer genes.
Nature 596, 428–432. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-021-03771-1.
6. Hess, J.M., Bernards, A., Kim, J., Miller, M., Taylor-Weiner, A., Haradh-
vala, N.J., Lawrence, M.S., and Getz, G. (2019). Passenger hotspot mu-
tations in cancer. Cancer Cell 36, 288–301.e14. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ccell.2019.08.002.
7. Mularoni, L., Sabarinathan, R., Deu-Pons, J., Gonzalez-Perez, A., and
Lo´ pez-Bigas, N. (2016). OncodriveFML: A general framework to identify
coding and non-coding regions with cancer driver mutations. Genome
Biol. 17, 128. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13059-016-0994-0.
8. Kamburov, A., Lawrence, M.S., Polak, P., Leshchiner, I., Lage, K., Golub,
T.R., Lander, E.S., and Getz, G. (2015). Comprehensive assessment of
cancer missense mutation clustering in protein structures. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA. 112, E5486–E5495. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.
1516373112.
9. Porta-Pardo, E., Garcia-Alonso, L., Hrabe, T., Dopazo, J., and Godzik, A.
(2015). A pan-cancer catalogue of cancer driver protein interaction inter-
faces. PLoS Comput. Biol. 11, e1004518. https://doi.org/10.1371/jour-
nal.pcbi.1004518.
10. Tokheim, C., Bhattacharya, R., Niknafs, N., Gygax, D.M., Kim, R., Ryan,
M., Masica, D.L., and Karchin, R. (2016). Exome-scale discovery of
hotspot mutation regions in human cancer using 3D protein structure.
Cancer Res. 76, 3719–3731. https://doi.org/10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-
15-3190.
11. Kandoth, C., McLellan, M.D., Vandin, F., Ye, K., Niu, B., Lu, C., Xie, M.,
Zhang, Q., McMichael, J.F., Wyczalkowski, M.A., et al. (2013). Mutational
landscape and signiﬁcance across 12 major cancer types. Nature 502,
333–339. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature12634.
12. Grande´ r, D. (1998). How do mutated oncogenes and tumor suppressor
genes cause cancer? Med. Oncol. 15, 20–26. https://doi.org/10.1007/
BF02787340.
13. Vasaikar, S., Huang, C., Wang, X., Petyuk, V.A., Savage, S.R., Wen, B.,
Dou, Y., Zhang, Y., Shi, Z., Arshad, O.A., et al. (2019). Proteogenomic
analysis of human colon cancer reveals new therapeutic opportunities.
Cell 177, 1035–1049.e19. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2019.03.030.
14. Clark, D.J., Dhanasekaran, S.M., Petralia, F., Pan, J., Song, X., Hu, Y., da
Veiga Leprevost, F., Reva, B., Lih, T.M., Chang, H.Y., et al. (2019). Inte-
grated proteogenomic characterization of clear cell renal cell carcinoma.
Cell 179, 964–983.e31. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2019.10.007.
15. Dou, Y., Kawaler, E.A., Cui Zhou, D., Gritsenko, M.A., Huang, C., Blu-
menberg, L., Karpova, A., Petyuk, V.A., Savage, S.R., Satpathy, S.,
et al. (2020). Proteogenomic characterization of endometrial carcinoma.
Cell 180, 729–748.e26. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2020.01.026.
16. Wang, L.B., Karpova, A., Gritsenko, M.A., Kyle, J.E., Cao, S., Li, Y., Ry-
kunov, D., Colaprico, A., Rothstein, J.H., Hong, R., et al. (2021). Proteo-
genomic and metabolomic characterization of human glioblastoma.
Cancer
Cell
39,
509–528.e20.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccell.2021.
01.006.
17. Gillette, M.A., Satpathy, S., Cao, S., Dhanasekaran, S.M., Vasaikar, S.V.,
Krug, K., Petralia, F., Li, Y., Liang, W.W., Reva, B., et al. (2020). Proteo-
genomic characterization reveals therapeutic vulnerabilities in lung
adenocarcinoma. Cell 182, 200–225.e35. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.
2020.06.013.
18. Huang, C., Chen, L., Savage, S.R., Eguez, R.V., Dou, Y., Li, Y., da Veiga
Leprevost, F., Jaehnig, E.J., Lei, J.T., Wen, B., et al. (2021). Proteoge-
nomic insights into the biology and treatment of HPV-negative head
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Cell 186, 3921–3944, August 31, 2023
3939
Article

and neck squamous cell carcinoma. Cancer Cell 39, 361–379.e16.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccell.2020.12.007.
19. Krug, K., Jaehnig, E.J., Satpathy, S., Blumenberg, L., Karpova, A.,
Anurag, M., Miles, G., Mertins, P., Geffen, Y., Tang, L.C., et al. (2020).
Proteogenomic landscape of breast cancer tumorigenesis and targeted
therapy. Cell 183, 1436–1456.e31. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2020.
10.036.
20. McDermott, J.E., Arshad, O.A., Petyuk, V.A., Fu, Y., Gritsenko, M.A.,
Clauss, T.R., Moore, R.J., Schepmoes, A.A., Zhao, R., Monroe, M.E.,
et al. (2020). Proteogenomic characterization of ovarian HGSC implicates
mitotic kinases, replication stress in observed chromosomal instability.
Cell Rep. Med. 1, 100004. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xcrm.2020.100004.
21. Cao, L., Huang, C., Cui Zhou, D., Hu, Y., Lih, T.M., Savage, S.R., Krug, K.,
Clark, D.J., Schnaubelt, M., Chen, L., et al. (2021). Proteogenomic char-
acterization of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma. Cell 184, 5031–
5052.e26. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2021.08.023.
22. Satpathy, S., Krug, K., Jean Beltran, P.M., Savage, S.R., Petralia, F., Ku-
mar-Sinha, C., Dou, Y., Reva, B., Kane, M.H., Avanessian, S.C., et al.
(2021). A proteogenomic portrait of lung squamous cell carcinoma. Cell
184, 4348–4371.e40. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2021.07.016.
23. Cao, Y., Zhou, W., Li, L., Wang, J., Gao, Z., Jiang, Y., Jiang, X., Shan, A.,
Bailey, M.H., Huang, K.L., et al. (2018). Pan-cancer analysis of somatic
mutations across 21 neuroendocrine tumor types. Cell Res. 28,
601–604. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41422-018-0019-5.
24. ICGC/TCGA Pan-Cancer Analysis of Whole Genomes (2020). Pan-can-
cer analysis of whole genomes. Nature 578, 82–93. https://doi.org/10.
1038/s41586-020-1969-6.
25. Chen, F., Wendl, M.C., Wyczalkowski, M.A., Bailey, M.H., Li, Y., and
Ding, L. (2021). Moving pan-cancer studies from basic research toward
the clinic. Nat. Cancer 2, 879–890. https://doi.org/10.1038/s43018-
021-00250-4.
26. Bailey, M.H., Meyerson, W.U., Dursi, L.J., Wang, L.B., Dong, G., Liang,
W.W., Weerasinghe, A., Li, S., Li, Y., Kelso, S., et al. (2020). Retrospective
evaluation of whole exome and genome mutation calls in 746 cancer
samples. Nat. Commun. 11, 4748. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-
020-18151-y.
27. Akbani, R., Ng, P.K., Werner, H.M., Shahmoradgoli, M., Zhang, F., Ju, Z.,
Liu, W., Yang, J.Y., Yoshihara, K., Li, J., et al. (2014). A pan-cancer pro-
teomic perspective on The Cancer Genome Atlas. Nat. Commun. 5,
3887. https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms4887.
28. Kim, J., Mouw, K.W., Polak, P., Braunstein, L.Z., Kamburov, A., Kwiat-
kowski, D.J., Rosenberg, J.E., Van Allen, E.M., D’Andrea, A., and Getz,
G. (2016). Somatic ERCC2 mutations are associated with a distinct
genomic signature in urothelial tumors. Nat. Genet. 48, 600–606.
https://doi.org/10.1038/ng.3557.
29. Kasar, S., Kim, J., Improgo, R., Tiao, G., Polak, P., Haradhvala, N., Law-
rence, M.S., Kiezun, A., Fernandes, S.M., Bahl, S., et al. (2015). Whole-
genome sequencing reveals activation-induced cytidine deaminase sig-
natures during indolent chronic lymphocytic leukaemia evolution. Nat.
Commun. 6, 8866. https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms9866.
30. Taylor-Weiner, A., Aguet, F., Haradhvala, N.J., Gosai, S., Anand, S., Kim,
J., Ardlie, K., Van Allen, E.M., and Getz, G. (2019). Scaling computational
genomics to millions of individuals with GPUs. Genome Biol. 20, 228.
https://doi.org/10.1186/s13059-019-1836-7.
31. Thorsson, V., Gibbs, D.L., Brown, S.D., Wolf, D., Bortone, D.S., Ou Yang,
T.H., Porta-Pardo, E., Gao, G.F., Plaisier, C.L., Eddy, J.A., et al. (2018).
The immune landscape of cancer. Immunity 48, 812–830.e14. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.immuni.2018.03.023.
32. Phillips, H.S., Kharbanda, S., Chen, R., Forrest, W.F., Soriano, R.H., Wu,
T.D., Misra, A., Nigro, J.M., Colman, H., Soroceanu, L., et al. (2006). Mo-
lecular subclasses of high-grade glioma predict prognosis, delineate a
pattern of disease progression, and resemble stages in neurogenesis.
Cancer Cell 9, 157–173. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccr.2006.02.019.
33. Verhaak, R.G., Hoadley, K.A., Purdom, E., Wang, V., Qi, Y., Wilkerson,
M.D., Miller, C.R., Ding, L., Golub, T., Mesirov, J.P., et al. (2010). Inte-
grated genomic analysis identiﬁes clinically relevant subtypes of glio-
blastoma characterized by abnormalities in PDGFRA, IDH1, EGFR, and
NF1. Cancer Cell 17, 98–110. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccr.2009.12.020.
34. Zarkoob, H., Taube, J.H., Singh, S.K., Mani, S.A., and Kohandel, M.
(2013). Investigating the link between molecular subtypes of glioblas-
toma, epithelial-mesenchymal transition, and CD133 cell surface protein.
PLoS One 8, e64169. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0064169.
35. Pietzner, M., Wheeler, E., Carrasco-Zanini, J., Kerrison, N.D., Oerton, E.,
Koprulu, M., Luan, J., Hingorani, A.D., Williams, S.A., Wareham, N.J., and
Langenberg, C. (2021). Synergistic insights into human health from ap-
tamer- and antibody-based proteomic proﬁling. Nat. Commun. 12,
6822. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-27164-0.
36. Chick, J.M., Munger, S.C., Simecek, P., Huttlin, E.L., Choi, K., Gatti,
D.M., Raghupathy, N., Svenson, K.L., Churchill, G.A., and Gygi, S.P.
(2016). Deﬁning the consequences of genetic variation on a proteome-
wide scale. Nature 534, 500–505. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature18270.
37. Freed-Pastor, W.A., and Prives, C. (2012). Mutant p53: one name,
many proteins. Genes Dev. 26, 1268–1286. https://doi.org/10.1101/
gad.190678.112.
38. Mighell, T.L., Evans-Dutson, S., and O’Roak, B.J. (2018). A saturation
mutagenesis approach to understanding PTEN lipid phosphatase activ-
ity and genotype-phenotype relationships. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 102,
943–955. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2018.03.018.
39. Matreyek, K.A., Starita, L.M., Stephany, J.J., Martin, B., Chiasson, M.A.,
Gray, V.E., Kircher, M., Khechaduri, A., Dines, J.N., Hause, R.J., et al.
(2018). Multiplex assessment of protein variant abundance by massively
parallel sequencing. Nat. Genet. 50, 874–882. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41588-018-0122-z.
40. Mo, X., Niu, Q., Ivanov, A.A., Tsang, Y.H., Tang, C., Shu, C., Li, Q., Qian,
K., Wahafu, A., Doyle, S.P., et al. (2022). Systematic discovery of
mutation-directed neo-protein-protein interactions in cancer. Cell 185,
1974–1985.e12. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2022.04.014.
41. Romanov, N., Kuhn, M., Aebersold, R., Ori, A., Beck, M., and Bork, P.
(2019). Disentangling genetic and environmental effects on the proteo-
types of individuals. Cell 177, 1308–1318.e10. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.cell.2019.03.015.
42. Sarbassov, D.D., Ali, S.M., Kim, D.H., Guertin, D.A., Latek, R.R., Erdju-
ment-Bromage, H., Tempst, P., and Sabatini, D.M. (2004). Rictor, a novel
binding partner of mTOR, deﬁnes a rapamycin-insensitive and raptor-in-
dependent pathway that regulates the cytoskeleton. Curr. Biol. 14, 1296–
1302. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2004.06.054.
43. van der Wal, T., and van Amerongen, R. (2020). Walking the tight wire be-
tween cell adhesion and WNT signalling: a balancing act for beta-catenin.
Open Biol. 10, 200267. https://doi.org/10.1098/rsob.200267.
44. Schick, S., Rendeiro, A.F., Runggatscher, K., Ringler, A., Boidol, B.,
Hinkel, M., Ma´ jek, P., Vulliard, L., Penz, T., Parapatics, K., et al. (2019).
Systematic characterization of BAF mutations provides insights into
intracomplex synthetic lethalities in human cancers. Nat. Genet. 51,
1399–1410. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41588-019-0477-9.
45. Kluba, M., Engelborghs, Y., Hofkens, J., and Mizuno, H. (2015). Inhibition
of receptor dimerization as a novel negative feedback mechanism of
EGFR signaling. PLoS One 10, e0139971. https://doi.org/10.1371/jour-
nal.pone.0139971.
46. Thirukkumaran, O.M., Kluba, M., Hofkens, J., and Mizuno, H. (2020).
Autophosphorylation of EGFR at Y954 facilitated homodimerization
and enhanced downstream signals. Biophys. J. 119, 2127–2137.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bpj.2020.10.008.
47. McMahon, M., Itoh, K., Yamamoto, M., and Hayes, J.D. (2003). Keap1-
dependent proteasomal degradation of transcription factor Nrf2 contrib-
utes to the negative regulation of antioxidant response element-driven
gene expression. J. Biol. Chem. 278, 21592–21600. https://doi.org/10.
1074/jbc.M300931200.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
3940
Cell 186, 3921–3944, August 31, 2023
Article

48. Wang, M.T., Holderﬁeld, M., Galeas, J., Delrosario, R., To, M.D., Balmain,
A., and McCormick, F. (2015). K-Ras promotes tumorigenicity through
suppression of non-canonical Wnt signaling. Cell 163, 1237–1251.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2015.10.041.
49. Bokhari, A., Jonchere, V., Lagrange, A., Bertrand, R., Svrcek, M., Marisa,
L., Buhard, O., Greene, M., Demidova, A., Jia, J., et al. (2018). Targeting
nonsense-mediated mRNA decay in colorectal cancers with microsatel-
lite instability. Oncogenesis 7, 70. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41389-018-
0079-x.
50. Lake, D., Correˆ a, S.A., and Mu¨ ller, J. (2016). Negative feedback regula-
tion of the ERK1/2 MAPK pathway. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 73, 4397–4413.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00018-016-2297-8.
51. Schumacher, T.N., and Schreiber, R.D. (2015). Neoantigens in cancer
immunotherapy. Science 348, 69–74. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.
aaa4971.
52. Turajlic, S., Litchﬁeld, K., Xu, H., Rosenthal, R., McGranahan, N.,
Reading, J.L., Wong, Y.N.S., Rowan, A., Kanu, N., Al Bakir, M., et al.
(2017).
Insertion-and-deletion-derived
tumour-speciﬁc
neoantigens
and the immunogenic phenotype: a pan-cancer analysis. Lancet Oncol.
18, 1009–1021. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1470-2045(17)30516-8.
53. Young, R.J., Waldeck, K., Martin, C., Foo, J.H., Cameron, D.P., Kirby, L.,
Do, H., Mitchell, C., Cullinane, C., Liu, W., et al. (2014). Loss of CDKN2A
expression is a frequent event in primary invasive melanoma and corre-
lates with sensitivity to the CDK4/6 inhibitor PD0332991 in melanoma cell
lines. Pigment Cell Melanoma Res. 27, 590–600. https://doi.org/10.1111/
pcmr.12228.
54. Elvin, J.A., Gay, L.M., Ort, R., Shuluk, J., Long, J., Shelley, L., Lee, R.,
Chalmers, Z.R., Frampton, G.M., Ali, S.M., et al. (2017). Clinical beneﬁt
in response to palbociclib treatment in refractory uterine leiomyosarco-
mas with a common CDKN2A alteration. Oncologist 22, 416–421.
https://doi.org/10.1634/theoncologist.2016-0310.
55. Finn, R.S., Dering, J., Conklin, D., Kalous, O., Cohen, D.J., Desai, A.J.,
Ginther, C., Ateﬁ, M., Chen, I., Fowst, C., et al. (2009). PD 0332991, a se-
lective cyclin D kinase 4/6 inhibitor, preferentially inhibits proliferation of
luminal estrogen receptor-positive human breast cancer cell lines in vitro.
Breast Cancer Res. 11, R77. https://doi.org/10.1186/bcr2419.
56. Dyson, N.J. (2016). RB1: a prototype tumor suppressor and an enigma.
Genes Dev. 30, 1492–1502. https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.282145.116.
57. Subramanian, A., Narayan, R., Corsello, S.M., Peck, D.D., Natoli, T.E.,
Lu, X., Gould, J., Davis, J.F., Tubelli, A.A., Asiedu, J.K., et al. (2017). A
next generation
connectivity
map: L1000 platform and the ﬁrst
1,000,000 proﬁles. Cell 171, 1437–1452.e17. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cell.2017.10.049.
58. Condorelli, R., Spring, L., O’Shaughnessy, J., Lacroix, L., Bailleux, C.,
Scott, V., Dubois, J., Nagy, R.J., Lanman, R.B., Iafrate, A.J., et al.
(2018). Polyclonal RB1 mutations and acquired resistance to CDK 4/6
inhibitors in patients with metastatic breast cancer. Ann. Oncol. 29,
640–645. https://doi.org/10.1093/annonc/mdx784.
59. Wang, B., Li, R., Wu, S., Liu, X., Ren, J., Li, J., Bi, K., Wang, Y., and Jia, H.
(2021). Breast cancer resistance to cyclin-dependent kinases 4/6 inhibi-
tors: intricacy of the molecular mechanisms. Front. Oncol. 11, 651541.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fonc.2021.651541.
60. Tsherniak, A., Vazquez, F., Montgomery, P.G., Weir, B.A., Kryukov, G.,
Cowley, G.S., Gill, S., Harrington, W.F., Pantel, S., Krill-Burger, J.M.,
et al. (2017). Deﬁning a cancer dependency map. Cell 170, 564–
576.e16. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2017.06.010.
61. Wang, L., Shao, X., Zhong, T., Wu, Y., Xu, A., Sun, X., Gao, H., Liu, Y.,
Lan, T., Tong, Y., et al. (2021). Discovery of a ﬁrst-in-class CDK2 selective
degrader for AML differentiation therapy. Nat. Chem. Biol. 17, 567–575.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41589-021-00742-5.
62. Torkamani, A., Wineinger, N.E., and Topol, E.J. (2018). The personal and
clinical utility of polygenic risk scores. Nat. Rev. Genet. 19, 581–590.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41576-018-0018-x.
63. Dudbridge, F. (2013). Power and predictive accuracy of polygenic risk
scores. PLoS Genet. 9, e1003348. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pgen.1003348.
64. Lewis, C.M., and Vassos, E. (2020). Polygenic risk scores: from research
tools to clinical instruments. Genome Med. 12, 44. https://doi.org/10.
1186/s13073-020-00742-5.
65. Zheng, F., Kelly, M.R., Ramms, D.J., Heintschel, M.L., Tao, K., Tutuncuo-
glu, B., Lee, J.J., Ono, K., Foussard, H., Chen, M., et al. (2021). Interpre-
tation of cancer mutations using a multiscale map of protein systems.
Science 374, eabf3067. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abf3067.
66. Hanahan, D., and Weinberg, R.A. (2011). Hallmarks of cancer: the
next generation. Cell 144, 646–674. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2011.
02.013.
67. Hanahan, D. (2022). Hallmarks of cancer: new dimensions. Cancer Dis-
cov. 12, 31–46. https://doi.org/10.1158/2159-8290.CD-21-1059.
68. Devarakonda, S., Li, Y., Martins Rodrigues, F., Sankararaman, S., Ka-
dara, H., Goparaju, C., Lanc, I., Pepin, K., Waqar, S.N., Morgensztern,
D., et al. (2021). Genomic proﬁling of lung adenocarcinoma in never-
smokers. J. Clin. Oncol. 39, 3747–3758. https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.
21.01691.
69. Barbie, D.A., Tamayo, P., Boehm, J.S., Kim, S.Y., Moody, S.E., Dunn, I.F.,
Schinzel, A.C., Sandy, P., Meylan, E., Scholl, C., et al. (2009). Systematic
RNA interference reveals that oncogenic KRAS-driven cancers require
TBK1. Nature 462, 108–112. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature08460.
70. Cheng, D.T., Mitchell, T.N., Zehir, A., Shah, R.H., Benayed, R., Syed, A.,
Chandramohan, R., Liu, Z.Y., Won, H.H., Scott, S.N., et al. (2015). Memo-
rial Sloan Kettering-integrated mutation proﬁling of actionable cancer
targets (MSK-Impact): a hybridization capture-based next-generation
sequencing clinical assay for solid tumor molecular oncology. J. Mol. Di-
agn. 17, 251–264. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmoldx.2014.12.006.
71. Chakravarty, D., Gao, J., Phillips, S.M., Kundra, R., Zhang, H., Wang, J.,
Rudolph, J.E., Yaeger, R., Soumerai, T., Nissan, M.H., et al. (2017). On-
coKB: a precision oncology knowledge base. JCO Precis. Oncol. 2017.
https://doi.org/10.1200/PO.17.00011.
72. Frampton, G.M., Fichtenholtz, A., Otto, G.A., Wang, K., Downing, S.R.,
He, J., Schnall-Levin, M., White, J., Sanford, E.M., An, P., et al. (2013).
Development and validation of a clinical cancer genomic proﬁling test
based on massively parallel DNA sequencing. Nat. Biotechnol. 31,
1023–1031. https://doi.org/10.1038/nbt.2696.
73. Ding, L., Bailey, M.H., Porta-Pardo, E., Thorsson, V., Colaprico, A., Ber-
trand, D., Gibbs, D.L., Weerasinghe, A., Huang, K.L., Tokheim, C., et al.
(2018). Perspective on oncogenic processes at the end of the beginning
of cancer genomics. Cell 173, 305–320.e10. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cell.2018.03.033.
74. Cobain, E.F., Wu, Y.M., Vats, P., Chugh, R., Worden, F., Smith, D.C.,
Schuetze, S.M., Zalupski, M.M., Sahai, V., Alva, A., et al. (2021). Assess-
ment of clinical beneﬁt of integrative genomic proﬁling in advanced solid
tumors. JAMA Oncol. 7, 525–533. https://doi.org/10.1001/jamaoncol.
2020.7987.
75. Marquart, J., Chen, E.Y., and Prasad, V. (2018). Estimation of the per-
centage of US patients with cancer who beneﬁt from genome-driven
oncology. JAMA Oncol. 4, 1093–1098. https://doi.org/10.1001/jamaon-
col.2018.1660.
76. Presley, C.J., Tang, D., Soulos, P.R., Chiang, A.C., Longtine, J.A., Adel-
son, K.B., Herbst, R.S., Zhu, W., Nussbaum, N.C., Sorg, R.A., et al.
(2018). Association of broad-based genomic sequencing with survival
among patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer in the commu-
nity oncology setting. JAMA 320, 469–477. https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.
2018.9824.
77. Kim, M., Park, J., Bouhaddou, M., Kim, K., Rojc, A., Modak, M., Sou-
cheray, M., McGregor, M.J., O’Leary, P., Wolf, D., et al. (2021). A protein
interaction landscape of breast cancer. Science 374, eabf3066. https://
doi.org/10.1126/science.abf3066.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Cell 186, 3921–3944, August 31, 2023
3941
Article

78. Baraba´ si, A.L., Gulbahce, N., and Loscalzo, J. (2011). Network medicine:
a network-based approach to human disease. Nat. Rev. Genet. 12,
56–68. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrg2918.
79. Unni, A.M., Lockwood, W.W., Zejnullahu, K., Lee-Lin, S.Q., and Varmus,
H. (2015). Evidence that synthetic lethality underlies the mutual exclusiv-
ity of oncogenic KRAS and EGFR mutations in lung adenocarcinoma.
eLife 4, e06907. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.06907.
80. Meacham, C.E., and Morrison, S.J. (2013). Tumour heterogeneity and
cancer cell plasticity. Nature 501, 328–337. https://doi.org/10.1038/
nature12624.
81. Barkley, D., Moncada, R., Pour, M., Liberman, D.A., Dryg, I., Werba, G.,
Wang, W., Baron, M., Rao, A., Xia, B., et al. (2022). Cancer cell states
recur across tumor types and form speciﬁc interactions with the tumor
microenvironment. Nat. Genet. 54, 1192–1201. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41588-022-01141-9.
82. Sibai, M., Cervilla, S., Grases, D., Musulen, E., Fortian, A., Romeo, M.,
Bernat, A., Tokheim, C., Esteller, M., Barretina, J., et al. (2022). Charting
the spatial landscape of cancer hallmarks. bioRxiv.. https://doi.org/10.
1101/2022.06.18.496114.
83. Brunner, A.D., Thielert, M., Vasilopoulou, C., Ammar, C., Coscia, F.,
Mund, A., Hoerning, O.B., Bache, N., Apalategui, A., Lubeck, M., et al.
(2022). Ultra-high sensitivity mass spectrometry quantiﬁes single-cell
proteome changes upon perturbation. Mol. Syst. Biol. 18, e10798.
https://doi.org/10.15252/msb.202110798.
84. Petelski, A.A., Emmott, E., Leduc, A., Huffman, R.G., Specht, H., Perl-
man, D.H., and Slavov, N. (2021). Multiplexed single-cell proteomics
using SCoPE2. Nat. Protoc. 16, 5398–5425. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41596-021-00616-z.
85. Slavov, N. (2022). Scaling up single-cell proteomics. Mol. Cell. Prote-
omics 21, 100179. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mcpro.2021.100179.
86. Lundberg, E., and Borner, G.H.H. (2019). Spatial proteomics: a powerful
discovery tool for cell biology. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 20, 285–302.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41580-018-0094-y.
87. Li, Y., Dou, Y., Da Veiga Leprevost, F., Geffen, Y., Calinawan, A.P., Aguet,
F., Akiyama, Y., Anand, S., Birger, C., Cao, S., et al. (2023). Proteogenomic
data and resources for pan-cancer analysis. Cancer Cell 41, 1397–1406.
88. Li, Y., Lih, T.M., Dhanasekaran, S.M., Mannan, R., Chen, L., Cieslik, M.,
Wu, Y., Lu, R.J., Clark, D.J., Ko1odziejczak, I., et al. (2023). Histopatho-
logic and proteogenomic heterogeneity reveals features of clear cell renal
cell carcinoma aggressiveness. Cancer Cell 41, 139–163.e17. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.ccell.2022.12.001.
89. Cui Zhou, D., Jayasinghe, R.G., Chen, S., Herndon, J.M., Iglesia, M.D.,
Navale, P., Wendl, M.C., Caravan, W., Sato, K., Storrs, E., et al. (2022).
Spatially restricted drivers and transitional cell populations cooperate
with the microenvironment in untreated and chemo-resistant pancreatic
cancer. Nat. Genet. 54, 1390–1405. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41588-
022-01157-1.
90. Travaglini, K.J., Nabhan, A.N., Penland, L., Sinha, R., Gillich, A., Sit, R.V.,
Chang, S., Conley, S.D., Mori, Y., Seita, J., et al. (2020). A molecular cell
atlas of the human lung from single-cell RNA sequencing. Nature 587,
619–625. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2922-4.
91. Li, H., and Durbin, R. (2009). Fast and accurate short read alignment with
Burrows-Wheeler transform. Bioinformatics 25, 1754–1760. https://doi.
org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btp324.
92. Scott, A.D., Huang, K.L., Weerasinghe, A., Mashl, R.J., Gao, Q., Martins
Rodrigues, F., Wyczalkowski, M.A., and Ding, L. (2019). CharGer: clinical
characterization of germline variants. Bioinformatics 35, 865–867.
https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/bty649.
93. Newman, A.M., Steen, C.B., Liu, C.L., Gentles, A.J., Chaudhuri, A.A.,
Scherer, F., Khodadoust, M.S., Esfahani, M.S., Luca, B.A., Steiner, D.,
et al. (2019). Determining cell type abundance and expression from
bulk tissues with digital cytometry. Nat. Biotechnol. 37, 773–782.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41587-019-0114-2.
94. Taylor-Weiner, A., Stewart, C., Giordano, T., Miller, M., Rosenberg, M.,
Macbeth, A., Lennon, N., Rheinbay, E., Landau, D.A., Wu, C.J., and
Getz, G. (2018). DeTiN: overcoming tumor-in-normal contamination.
Nat. Methods 15, 531–534. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-018-0036-9.
95. Mermel, C.H., Schumacher, S.E., Hill, B., Meyerson, M.L., Beroukhim, R.,
and Getz, G. (2011). GISTIC2.0 facilitates sensitive and conﬁdent locali-
zation of the targets of focal somatic copy-number alteration in human
cancers. Genome Biol. 12, R41. https://doi.org/10.1186/gb-2011-12-
4-r41.
96. Wilkerson, M.D., and Hayes, D.N. (2010). ConsensusClusterPlus: a class
discovery tool with conﬁdence assessments and item tracking. Bioinfor-
matics 26, 1572–1573. https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btq170.
97. Alexandrov, L.B., Kim, J., Haradhvala, N.J., Huang, M.N., Tian Ng, A.W.,
Wu, Y., Boot, A., Covington, K.R., Gordenin, D.A., Bergstrom, E.N., et al.
(2020). The repertoire of mutational signatures in human cancer. Nature
578, 94–101. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-1943-3.
98. Sun, S.Q., Mashl, R.J., Sengupta, S., Scott, A.D., Wang, W., Batra, P.,
Wang, L.B., Wyczalkowski, M.A., and Ding, L. (2018). Database of evi-
dence for precision oncology portal. Bioinformatics 34, 4315–4317.
https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/bty531.
99. Benelli, M., Pescucci, C., Marseglia, G., Severgnini, M., Torricelli, F., and
Magi, A. (2012). Discovering chimeric transcripts in paired-end RNA-seq
data by using EricScript. Bioinformatics 28, 3232–3239. https://doi.org/
10.1093/bioinformatics/bts617.
100. Anders, S., Pyl, P.T., and Huber, W. (2015). HTSeq–a Python framework
to work with high-throughput sequencing data. Bioinformatics 31,
166–169. https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btu638.
101. Zhang, J., White, N.M., Schmidt, H.K., Fulton, R.S., Tomlinson, C., War-
ren, W.C., Wilson, R.K., and Maher, C.A. (2016). INTEGRATE: gene fusion
discovery using whole genome and transcriptome data. Genome Res.
26, 108–118. https://doi.org/10.1101/gr.186114.114.
102. Chen, X., Schulz-Trieglaff, O., Shaw, R., Barnes, B., Schlesinger, F., Ka¨ ll-
berg, M., Cox, A.J., Kruglyak, S., and Saunders, C.T. (2016). Manta: rapid
detection of structural variants and indels for germline and cancer
sequencing applications. Bioinformatics 32, 1220–1222. https://doi.
org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btv710.
103. Cibulskis, K., Lawrence, M.S., Carter, S.L., Sivachenko, A., Jaffe, D.,
Sougnez, C., Gabriel, S., Meyerson, M., Lander, E.S., and Getz, G.
(2013). Sensitive detection of somatic point mutations in impure and het-
erogeneous cancer samples. Nat. Biotechnol. 31, 213–219. https://doi.
org/10.1038/nbt.2514.
104. Ye, K., Schulz, M.H., Long, Q., Apweiler, R., and Ning, Z. (2009). Pindel: A
pattern growth approach to detect break points of large deletions and
medium sized insertions from paired-end short reads. Bioinformatics
25, 2865–2871. https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btp394.
105. Polpitiya, A.D., Qian, W.J., Jaitly, N., Petyuk, V.A., Adkins, J.N., Camp,
D.G., 2nd, Anderson, G.A., and Smith, R.D. (2008). DAnTE: a statistical
tool for quantitative analysis of -omics data. Bioinformatics 24, 1556–
1558. https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btn217.
106. Li, H., Handsaker, B., Wysoker, A., Fennell, T., Ruan, J., Homer, N.,
Marth, G., Abecasis, G., and Durbin, R.; 1000 Genome Project Data Pro-
cessing Subgroup (2009). The Sequence Alignment/Map format and
SAMtools. Bioinformatics 25, 2078–2079. https://doi.org/10.1093/bioin-
formatics/btp352.
107. Haas, B.J., Dobin, A., Li, B., Stransky, N., Pochet, N., and Regev, A.
(2019). Accuracy assessment of fusion transcript detection via read-
mapping and de novo fusion transcript assembly-based methods.
Genome Biol. 20, 213. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13059-019-1842-9.
108. Kim, S., Schefﬂer, K., Halpern, A.L., Bekritsky, M.A., Noh, E., Ka¨ llberg,
M., Chen, X., Kim, Y., Beyter, D., Krusche, P., and Saunders, C.T.
(2018). Strelka2: fast and accurate calling of germline and somatic vari-
ants. Nat. Methods 15, 591–594. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-018-
0051-x.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
3942
Cell 186, 3921–3944, August 31, 2023
Article

109. Johnson, J.L., Yaron, T.M., Huntsman, E.M., Kerelsky, A., Song, J., Re-
gev, A., Lin, T.Y., Liberatore, K., Cizin, D.M., Cohen, B.M., et al. (2023). An
atlas of substrate speciﬁcities for the human serine/threonine kinome.
Nature 613, 759–766. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-022-05575-3.
110. Conway, J.R., Lex, A., and Gehlenborg, N. (2017). UpSetR: an R package
for the visualization of intersecting sets and their properties. Bioinformat-
ics 33, 2938–2940. https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btx364.
111. Koboldt, D.C., Zhang, Q., Larson, D.E., Shen, D., McLellan, M.D., Lin, L.,
Miller, C.A., Mardis, E.R., Ding, L., and Wilson, R.K. (2012). VarScan 2:
somatic mutation and copy number alteration discovery in cancer by
exome sequencing. Genome Res. 22, 568–576. https://doi.org/10.
1101/gr.129684.111.
112. Aran, D., Hu, Z., and Butte, A.J. (2017). xCell: digitally portraying the tis-
sue cellular heterogeneity landscape. Genome Biol. 18, 220. https://doi.
org/10.1186/s13059-017-1349-1.
113. Haradhvala, N.J., Polak, P., Stojanov, P., Covington, K.R., Shinbrot, E.,
Hess, J.M., Rheinbay, E., Kim, J., Maruvka, Y.E., Braunstein, L.Z., et al.
(2016). Mutational strand asymmetries in cancer genomes reveal mech-
anisms of DNA damage and repair. Cell 164, 538–549. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.cell.2015.12.050.
114. McKenna, A., Hanna, M., Banks, E., Sivachenko, A., Cibulskis, K.,
Kernytsky, A., Garimella, K., Altshuler, D., Gabriel, S., Daly, M., and De-
Pristo, M.A. (2010). The genome analysis toolkit: a MapReduce frame-
work for analyzing next-generation DNA sequencing data. Genome
Res. 20, 1297–1303. https://doi.org/10.1101/gr.107524.110.
115. McLaren, W., Gil, L., Hunt, S.E., Riat, H.S., Ritchie, G.R., Thormann, A.,
Flicek, P., and Cunningham, F. (2016). The Ensembl variant effect predic-
tor. Genome Biol. 17, 122. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13059-016-0974-4.
116. Richards, S., Aziz, N., Bale, S., Bick, D., Das, S., Gastier-Foster, J.,
Grody, W.W., Hegde, M., Lyon, E., Spector, E., et al. (2015). Standards
and guidelines for the interpretation of sequence variants: a joint
consensus recommendation of the American College of Medical Ge-
netics and Genomics and the Association for Molecular Pathology.
Genet. Med. 17, 405–424. https://doi.org/10.1038/gim.2015.30.
117. Kumar, P., Henikoff, S., and Ng, P.C. (2009). Predicting the effects of
coding non-synonymous variants on protein function using the SIFT
algorithm. Nat. Protoc. 4, 1073–1081. https://doi.org/10.1038/nprot.
2009.86.
118. Adzhubei, I., Jordan, D.M., and Sunyaev, S.R. (2013). Chapter 7.
Predicting functional effect of human missense mutations using
PolyPhen-2Unit7.20. Curr. Protoc. Hum. Genet. Chapter 7. https://doi.
org/10.1002/0471142905.hg0720s76.
119. Huang, K.L., Mashl, R.J., Wu, Y., Ritter, D.I., Wang, J., Oh, C., Paczkow-
ska, M., Reynolds, S., Wyczalkowski, M.A., Oak, N., et al. (2018). Patho-
genic germline variants in 10,389 adult cancers. Cell 173, 355–370.e14.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2018.03.039.
120. Karczewski, K.J., Francioli, L.C., Tiao, G., Cummings, B.B., Alfo¨ ldi, J.,
Wang, Q., Collins, R.L., Laricchia, K.M., Ganna, A., Birnbaum, D.P.,
et al. (2020). The mutational constraint spectrum quantiﬁed from variation
in 141,456 humans. Nature 581, 434–443. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41586-020-2308-7.
121. 1000 Genomes Project Consortium, Auton, A., Brooks, L.D., Durbin,
R.M., Garrison, E.P., Kang, H.M., Korbel, J.O., Marchini, J.L., McCarthy,
S., McVean, G.A., et al. (2015). A global reference for human genetic vari-
ation. Nature 526, 68–74. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature15393.
122. Xi, R., Lee, S., Xia, Y., Kim, T.M., and Park, P.J. (2016). Copy number
analysis of whole-genome data using BIC-seq2 and its application to
detection of cancer susceptibility variants. Nucleic Acids Res. 44,
6274–6286. https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkw491.
123. Saghaﬁnia, S., Mina, M., Riggi, N., Hanahan, D., and Ciriello, G. (2018).
Pan-cancer landscape of aberrant DNA methylation across human tu-
mors. Cell Rep. 25, 1066–1080.e8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.
2018.09.082.
124. Gao, Q., Liang, W.W., Foltz, S.M., Mutharasu, G., Jayasinghe, R.G., Cao,
S., Liao, W.W., Reynolds, S.M., Wyczalkowski, M.A., Yao, L., et al.
(2018). Driver fusions and their implications in the development and treat-
ment of human cancers. Cell Rep. 23, 227–238.e3. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.celrep.2018.03.050.
125. Babiceanu, M., Qin, F., Xie, Z., Jia, Y., Lopez, K., Janus, N., Facemire, L.,
Kumar, S., Pang, Y., Qi, Y., et al. (2016). Recurrent chimeric fusion RNAs
in non-cancer tissues and cells. Nucleic Acids Res. 44, 2859–2872.
https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkw032.
126. Hao, Y., Hao, S., Andersen-Nissen, E., Mauck, W.M., 3rd, Zheng, S., But-
ler, A., Lee, M.J., Wilk, A.J., Darby, C., Zager, M., et al. (2021). Integrated
analysis of multimodal single-cell data. Cell 184, 3573–3587.e29. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2021.04.048.
127. Yoshihara, K., Shahmoradgoli, M., Martı´nez, E., Vegesna, R., Kim, H.,
Torres-Garcia, W., Trevin˜ o, V., Shen, H., Laird, P.W., Levine, D.A., et al.
(2013). Inferring tumour purity and stromal and immune cell admixture
from expression data. Nat. Commun. 4, 2612. https://doi.org/10.1038/
ncomms3612.
128. 1000 Genomes Project Consortium, Abecasis, G.R., Altshuler, D.,
Auton, A., Brooks, L.D., Durbin, R.M., Gibbs, R.A., Hurles, M.E., and
McVean, G.A. (2010). A map of human genome variation from popula-
tion-scale sequencing. Nature 467, 1061–1073. https://doi.org/10.
1038/nature09534.
129. Andreatta, M., and Nielsen, M. (2016). Gapped sequence alignment us-
ing artiﬁcial neural networks: application to the MHC class I system. Bio-
informatics 32, 511–517. https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btv639.
130. Kundra, R., Zhang, H., Sheridan, R., Sirintrapun, S.J., Wang, A., Ochoa,
A., Wilson, M., Gross, B., Sun, Y., Madupuri, R., et al. (2021). OncoTree: A
cancer classiﬁcation system for precision oncology. JCO Clin. Cancer
Inform. 5, 221–230. https://doi.org/10.1200/CCI.20.00108.
131. Sondka, Z., Bamford, S., Cole, C.G., Ward, S.A., Dunham, I., and Forbes,
S.A. (2018). The COSMIC Cancer Gene Census: describing genetic
dysfunction across all human cancers. Nat. Rev. Cancer 18, 696–705.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41568-018-0060-1.
132. Ellrott, K., Bailey, M.H., Saksena, G., Covington, K.R., Kandoth, C.,
Stewart, C., Hess, J., Ma, S., Chiotti, K.E., McLellan, M., et al. (2018).
Scalable open science approach for mutation calling of tumor exomes
using multiple genomic pipelines. Cell Syst. 6, 271–281.e7. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.cels.2018.03.002.
133. Pagel, K.A., Kim, R., Moad, K., Busby, B., Zheng, L., Tokheim, C., Ryan,
M., and Karchin, R. (2020). Integrated informatics analysis of cancer-
related variants. JCO Clin. Cancer Inform. 4, 310–317. https://doi.org/
10.1200/CCI.19.00132.
134. Ng, P.C., and Henikoff, S. (2002). Accounting for human polymorphisms
predicted to affect protein function. Genome Res. 12, 436–446. https://
doi.org/10.1101/gr.212802.
135. Carter, H., Douville, C., Stenson, P.D., Cooper, D.N., and Karchin, R.
(2013). Identifying Mendelian disease genes with the variant effect
scoring tool. BMC Genomics 14 Suppl 3, S3. https://doi.org/10.1186/
1471-2164-14-S3-S3.
136. Reva, B., Antipin, Y., and Sander, C. (2011). Predicting the functional
impact of protein mutations: application to cancer genomics. Nucleic
Acids Res. 39, e118. https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkr407.
137. Mao, Y., Chen, H., Liang, H., Meric-Bernstam, F., Mills, G.B., and Chen,
K. (2013). CanDrA: cancer-speciﬁc driver missense mutation annotation
with optimized features. PLoS One 8, e77945. https://doi.org/10.1371/
journal.pone.0077945.
138. Shihab, H.A., Gough, J., Cooper, D.N., Stenson, P.D., Barker, G.L., Ed-
wards, K.J., Day, I.N., and Gaunt, T.R. (2013). Predicting the functional,
molecular, and phenotypic consequences of amino acid substitutions
using hidden Markov models. Hum. Mutat. 34, 57–65. https://doi.org/
10.1002/humu.22225.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Cell 186, 3921–3944, August 31, 2023
3943
Article

139. Carter, H., Chen, S., Isik, L., Tyekucheva, S., Velculescu, V.E., Kinzler,
K.W., Vogelstein, B., and Karchin, R. (2009). Cancer-speciﬁc high-
throughput annotation of somatic mutations: computational prediction
of driver missense mutations. Cancer Res. 69, 6660–6667. https://doi.
org/10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-1133.
140. Gonzalez-Perez,
A.,
Deu-Pons,
J.,
and
Lopez-Bigas,
N.
(2012).
Improving the prediction of the functional impact of cancer mutations
by baseline tolerance transformation. Genome Med. 4, 89. https://doi.
org/10.1186/gm390.
141. Niu, B., Scott, A.D., Sengupta, S., Bailey, M.H., Batra, P., Ning, J., Wyc-
zalkowski, M.A., Liang, W.W., Zhang, Q., McLellan, M.D., et al. (2016).
Protein-structure-guided discovery of functional mutations across 19
cancer types. Nat. Genet. 48, 827–837. https://doi.org/10.1038/ng.3586.
142. Gao, J., Chang, M.T., Johnsen, H.C., Gao, S.P., Sylvester, B.E., Sumer,
S.O., Zhang, H., Solit, D.B., Taylor, B.S., Schultz, N., and Sander, C.
(2017). 3D clusters of somatic mutations in cancer reveal numerous
rare mutations as functional targets. Genome Med. 9, 4. https://doi.
org/10.1186/s13073-016-0393-x.
143. Chang, M.T., Bhattarai, T.S., Schram, A.M., Bielski, C.M., Donoghue,
M.T.A., Jonsson, P., Chakravarty, D., Phillips, S., Kandoth, C., Penson,
A., et al. (2018). Accelerating discovery of functional mutant alleles in
cancer. Cancer Discov. 8, 174–183. https://doi.org/10.1158/2159-
8290.CD-17-0321.
144. Vogelstein, B., Papadopoulos, N., Velculescu, V.E., Zhou, S., Diaz, L.A.,
Jr., and Kinzler, K.W. (2013). Cancer genome landscapes. Science 339,
1546–1558. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1235122.
145. Tokheim, C.J., Papadopoulos, N., Kinzler, K.W., Vogelstein, B., and
Karchin, R. (2016). Evaluating the evaluation of cancer driver genes.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 113, 14330–14335. https://doi.org/10.1073/
pnas.1616440113.
146. Murphy, C., and Elemento, O. (2016). AGFusion: annotate and visualize
gene fusions. bioRxiv.. https://doi.org/10.1101/080903.
147. Varadi, M., Anyango, S., Deshpande, M., Nair, S., Natassia, C., Yorda-
nova, G., Yuan, D., Stroe, O., Wood, G., Laydon, A., et al. (2022). Alpha-
Fold Protein Structure Database: massively expanding the structural
coverage of protein-sequence space with high-accuracy models. Nu-
cleic Acids Res. 50, D439–D444. https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkab1061.
148. Kabsch, W., and Sander, C. (1983). Dictionary of protein secondary struc-
ture: pattern recognition of hydrogen-bonded and geometrical features.
Biopolymers 22, 2577–2637. https://doi.org/10.1002/bip.360221211.
149. Rost, B., and Sander, C. (1994). Conservation and prediction of solvent
accessibility in protein families. Proteins 20, 216–226. https://doi.org/
10.1002/prot.340200303.
150. Szklarczyk, D., Gable, A.L., Nastou, K.C., Lyon, D., Kirsch, R., Pyysalo, S.,
Doncheva, N.T., Legeay, M., Fang, T., Bork, P., et al. (2021). The STRING
database in 2021: customizable protein-protein networks, and functional
characterization of user-uploaded gene/measurement sets. Nucleic Acids
Res. 49, D605–D612. https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkaa1074.
151. Calderone, A., Iannuccelli, M., Peluso, D., and Licata, L. (2020). Using the
MINT database to search protein interactions. Curr. Protoc. Bioinformat-
ics 69, e93. https://doi.org/10.1002/cpbi.93.
152. Oughtred, R., Stark, C., Breitkreutz, B.J., Rust, J., Boucher, L., Chang,
C., Kolas, N., O’Donnell, L., Leung, G., McAdam, R., et al. (2019). The
BioGRID interaction database: 2019 update. Nucleic Acids Res. 47,
D529–D541. https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gky1079.
153. Del Toro, N., Shrivastava, A., Ragueneau, E., Meldal, B., Combe, C., Bar-
rera, E., Perfetto, L., How, K., Ratan, P., Shirodkar, G., et al. (2022). The
IntAct database: efﬁcient access to ﬁne-grained molecular interaction
data. Nucleic Acids Res. 50, D648–D653. https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/
gkab1006.
154. Giurgiu, M., Reinhard, J., Brauner, B., Dunger-Kaltenbach, I., Fobo, G.,
Frishman, G., Montrone, C., and Ruepp, A. (2019). CORUM: The compre-
hensive resource of mammalian protein complexes-2019. Nucleic Acids
Res. 47, D559–D563. https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gky973.
155. Luck, K., Kim, D.K., Lambourne, L., Spirohn, K., Begg, B.E., Bian, W.,
Brignall, R., Cafarelli, T., Campos-Laborie, F.J., Charloteaux, B., et al.
(2020). A reference map of the human binary protein interactome. Nature
580, 402–408. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2188-x.
156. Flanders, W.D., DerSimonian, R., and Freedman, D.S. (1992). Interpreta-
tion of linear regression models that include transformations or interac-
tion terms. Ann. Epidemiol. 2, 735–744. https://doi.org/10.1016/1047-
2797(92)90018-L.
157. Fritz, M.S., and Mackinnon, D.P. (2007). Required sample size to detect
the mediated effect. Psychol. Sci. 18, 233–239. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.
1467-9280.2007.01882.x.
158. Steen, J., Loeys, T., Moerkerke, B., and Vansteelandt, S. (2017). medﬂex:
an R package for ﬂexible mediation analysis using natural effect models.
J. Stat. Soft. 76, 1–46. https://doi.org/10.18637/jss.v076.i11.
159. Hornbeck, P.V., Zhang, B., Murray, B., Kornhauser, J.M., Latham, V., and
Skrzypek, E. (2015). PhosphoSitePlus, 2014: mutations, PTMs and reca-
librations. Nucleic Acids Res. 43, D512–D520. https://doi.org/10.1093/
nar/gku1267.
160. Chen, B., Khodadoust, M.S., Liu, C.L., Newman, A.M., and Alizadeh, A.A.
(2018). Proﬁling tumor inﬁltrating immune cells with CIBERSORT.
Methods Mol. Biol. 1711, 243–259. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-
4939-7493-1_12.
161. Jiang, P., Gu, S., Pan, D., Fu, J., Sahu, A., Hu, X., Li, Z., Traugh, N., Bu, X.,
Li, B., et al. (2018). Signatures of T cell dysfunction and exclusion predict
cancer immunotherapy response. Nat. Med. 24, 1550–1558. https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41591-018-0136-1.
162. ENCODE Project Consortium (2012). An integrated encyclopedia of DNA
elements in the human genome. Nature 489, 57–74. https://doi.org/10.
1038/nature11247.
163. Chicas, A., Wang, X., Zhang, C., McCurrach, M., Zhao, Z., Mert, O., Dick-
ins, R.A., Narita, M., Zhang, M., and Lowe, S.W. (2010). Dissecting the
unique role of the retinoblastoma tumor suppressor during cellular
senescence. Cancer Cell 17, 376–387. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccr.
2010.01.023.
164. Ferrari, R., Gou, D., Jawdekar, G., Johnson, S.A., Nava, M., Su, T., You-
sef, A.F., Zemke, N.R., Pellegrini, M., Kurdistani, S.K., and Berk, A.J.
(2014). Adenovirus small E1A employs the lysine acetylases p300/CBP
and tumor suppressor Rb to repress select host genes and promote pro-
ductive virus infection. Cell Host Microbe 16, 663–676. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.chom.2014.10.004.
165. Zheng, R., Wan, C., Mei, S., Qin, Q., Wu, Q., Sun, H., Chen, C.H., Brown,
M., Zhang, X., Meyer, C.A., and Liu, X.S. (2019). Cistrome data browser:
expanded datasets and new tools for gene regulatory analysis. Nucleic
Acids Res. 47, D729–D735. https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gky1094.
166. Wang, S., Zang, C., Xiao, T., Fan, J., Mei, S., Qin, Q., Wu, Q., Li, X., Xu, K.,
He, H.H., et al. (2016). Modeling cis-regulation with a compendium of
genome-wide histone H3K27ac proﬁles. Genome Res. 26, 1417–1429.
https://doi.org/10.1101/gr.201574.115.
167. Stoney, R.A., Schwartz, J.M., Robertson, D.L., and Nenadic, G. (2018).
Using set theory to reduce redundancy in pathway sets. BMC Bioinfor-
matics 19, 386. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12859-018-2355-3.
168. Geffen, Y., Anand, S., Akiyama, Y., Yaron, T.M., Song, Y., Johnson, J.L.,
Govindan, A., Babur, O., Li, Y., Huntsman, E., et al. (2023). Pan-cancer
analysis of post-translational modiﬁcations reveals shared patterns of
protein regulation. Cell 186, 3945–3967.
169. Lawrence, M.S., Stojanov, P., Mermel, C.H., Robinson, J.T., Garraway,
L.A., Golub, T.R., Meyerson, M., Gabriel, S.B., Lander, E.S., and Getz, G.
(2014). Discovery and saturation analysis of cancer genes across 21
tumour types. Nature 505, 495–501. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature12912.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
3944
Cell 186, 3921–3944, August 31, 2023
Article

STAR+METHODS
KEY RESOURCES TABLE
REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
Deposited data
CPTAC clinical data and proteomic data
Li et al.87
Proteomic Data Commons (PDC: https://pdc.
cancer.gov/pdc/cptac-pancancer)
CPTAC genomic, transcriptomic data
Li et al.87
Proteomic Data Commons (PDC:https://pdc.
cancer.gov/pdc/cptac-pancancer), and Cancer
Data Service (CDS: https://dataservice.
datacommons.cancer.gov/)
CPTAC pathology and radiology images
Li et al.87
Imaging Data Commons (https://portal.imaging.
datacommons.cancer.gov/explore/)
Full proteomic data tables
This manuscript
Proteomic Data Commons (PDC: https://pdc.
cancer.gov/pdc/cptac-pancancer)
TCGA
Bailey et al.1
Genomic Data Commons (GDC: )
single nuclei RNA sequencing and
single-cell RNA sequencing
Wang et al.,16 Li et al.,88
Cui Zhou et al.,89 and
Travaglini et al.90
https://portal.gdc.cancer.gov/projects/CPTAC-3
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/projects/gap/
cgi-bin/study.cgi?study_id=phs002371.v1.p1
https://www.synapse.org/#!Synapse:syn21041850
Software and algorithms
3Dmapper
Porta-Pardo Lab
https://github.com/vicruiser/3Dmapper
Ancestry prediction
Li Ding Lab
https://github.com/ding-lab/ancestry
BWA v0.7.17-r1188
Li and Durbin91
http://bio-bwa.sourceforge.net/
C3PO
This manuscript
https://github.com/MHBailey/C3PO_polygenic
CharGer v.0.5.4
Scott et al.92
https://github.com/ding-lab/CharGer/tree/v0.5.4
CIBERSORTx
Newman et al.93
https://cibersortx.stanford.edu/
WES hg38 characterization pipeline
Getz Lab
https://terra.bio/
bam-readcount v0.8
McDonnell Genome
Institute
https://github.com/genome/bam-readcount
GATK4’s CalculateContamination
GATK
https://gatk.broadinstitute.org/hc/en-us/articles/
360036888972-CalculateContamination
GATK4 Picard tools
GATK
https://github.com/broadinstitute/picard
GATK4 Funcotator
GATK
https://gatk.broadinstitute.org/hc/en-us/articles/
360037224432-Funcotator
DeTiN
Taylor-Weiner et al.94
https://github.com/getzlab/deTiN
Spectrum Mill
Karl R. Clauser,
Steven Carr Lab
https://proteomics.broadinstitute.org/
GISTIC2.0
Mermel et al.95
https://github.com/broadinstitute/gistic2
ConsensusClusterPlus v1.48.0
Wilkerson and Hayes96
https://bioconductor.org/packages/ConsensusClusterPlus/
COSMIC Mutational Signatures v3
Alexandrov et al.97
https://cancer.sanger.ac.uk/cosmic/signatures/
DEPO
Sun et al.98
http://dinglab.wustl.edu/depo
EricScript v0.5.5
Benelli et al.99
https://sites.google.com/site/bioericscript/
germlinewrapper v1.1
Li Ding Lab
https://github.com/ding-lab/germlinewrapper
HTSeq v0.11.2
Anders et al.100
https://github.com/simon-anders/htseq
INTEGRATE v0.2.6
Zhang et al.101
https://sourceforge.net/projects/integrate-fusion/
Manta v1.6.0
Chen et al.102
https://github.com/Illumina/manta
Methylation analysis
Li Ding Lab
https://github.com/ding-lab/cptac_methylation
MSI prediction
Li Ding Lab
https://github.com/ding-lab/msisensor
MuTect v1.1.7
Cibulskis et al.103
https://github.com/broadinstitute/mutect
Pindel v0.2.5
Ye et al.104
https://github.com/genome/pindel
(Continued on next page)
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Cell 186, 3921–3944.e1–e12, August 31, 2023
e1
Article

RESOURCE AVAILABILITY
Lead contact
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulﬁlled by the Lead Contact, Li Ding
(lding@wustl.edu).
Materials availability
This study did not generate new unique reagents.
Data and code availability
d Raw and processed proteomics as well as open-access genomic data, can be obtained via Proteomic Data Commons (PDC) at
https://pdc.cancer.gov/pdc/cptac-pancancer. Raw genomic and transcriptomic data ﬁles can be accessed via the Genomic
Data Commons (GDC) Data Portal at https://portal.gdc.cancer.gov with dbGaP Study Accession: phs001287.v16.p6. Com-
plete CPTAC pan-cancer controlled and processed data can be accessed via the Cancer Data Service (CDS: https://
dataservice.datacommons.cancer.gov/). The CPTAC pan-cancer data hosted in CDS is controlled data and can be accessed
through the NCI DAC approved, dbGaP compiled whitelists. Users can access the data for analysis through the Seven Bridges
Cancer Genomics Cloud (SB-CGC) which is one of the NCI-funded Cloud Resource/platform for compute intensive analysis.
Instructions to access data: 1. Create an account on CGC, Seven Bridges (https://cgc-accounts.sbgenomics.com/auth/
register 2. Get approval from dbGaP to access the controlled study (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/projects/gap/cgi-bin/
study.cgi?study_id=phs001287.v16.p6 ) 3. Log into CGC to access Cancer Data Service (CDS) File Explore 4. Copy data
into your own space and start analysis and exploration 5. Visit the CDS page on CGC to see what studies are available and
instructions and guides to use the resources. (https://docs.cancergenomicscloud.org/page/cds-data). We focused on the
CPTAC samples with both genomic and proteomic data available to investigate the pan-cancer proteogenomic impacts of
oncogenic drivers.
d All original code has been deposited at GitHub and is publicly available as of the date of publication. DOIs are listed in the key
resources table.
d Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the lead contact upon request.
EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS
Human subjects
A total of 1064 participants were included in this study. Prospective biospecimen collection (tumor, germline blood and adjacent
normal samples where feasible) followed a tumor type speciﬁc protocol and standard operating procedures (SOPs), where sample
collection, qualiﬁcation and processing were optimized for both genomics and proteomics.13–22 CPTAC samples were collected by
30+ tissue source sites from both domestic and international locations and processed by a central biospecimen core resource. The
samples were pathology qualiﬁed by a general pathologist and later reconﬁrmed by a disease-speciﬁc expert pathologist through
histopathology image review and immunohistochemistry assays where applicable.
Continued
REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
Python v3.7
Python Software
Foundation
https://www.python.org/
R v3.6
R Development
Core Team
https://www.R-project.org
R-rollup
Polpitiya et al.105
https://omics.pnl.gov/software/danter
Samtools v1.2
Li et al.106
https://www.htslib.org/
SignatureAnalyzer
Alexandrov et al.97
https://github.com/broadinstitute/getzlab-SignatureAnalyzer
somaticwrapper v1.6
Li Ding Lab
https://github.com/ding-lab/somaticwrapper
STAR-Fusion v1.5.0
Haas et al.107
https://github.com/STAR-Fusion/STAR-Fusion
Strelka v2.9.2
Kim et al.108
https://github.com/Illumina/strelka
the Kinase Library 2.4.0
Johnson et al.109
https://kinase-library.phosphosite.org/
UpSetR
Conway et al.110
https://github.com/hms-dbmi/UpSetR/
VarScan v2.3.8
Koboldt et al.111
https://dkoboldt.github.io/varscan/
xCell v1.2
Aran et al.112
http://xcell.ucsf.edu/
ll
OPEN ACCESS
e2
Cell 186, 3921–3944.e1–e12, August 31, 2023
Article

Clinical data annotation
Clinical data were obtained from TSS and aggregated by the Biospecimen Core Resource (BCR, Van Andel Research Institute (Grand
Rapids, MI)). Data forms were stored as Microsoft Excel ﬁles (.xls). Clinical data can be accessed and downloaded from the CPTAC
Data Portal and https://pdc.cancer.gov/pdc/cptac-pancancer as described in Li et al.87.
METHOD DETAILS
Harmonized genome alignment
WGS, WES, and RNA-Seq sequence data were harmonized by NCI Genomic Data Commons (GDC) https://gdc.cancer.gov/
about-data/gdc-data-harmonization, which included alignment to GDC’s hg38 human reference genome (GRCh38.d1.vd1) and
additional quality checks. All the downstream genomic processing was based on the GDC-aligned BAMs to ensure reproducibility.
Somatic mutation calling
Somatic Mutation Calling (pipeline from Washington University in St Louis)
Somatic mutations were called by the Somaticwrapper pipeline v1.6 (https://github.com/ding-lab/somaticwrapper), which includes
four different callers, i.e., Strelka v.2,108 MUTECT v1.1.7,103 VarScan v.2.3.8,111 and Pindel v.0.2.5104 from WES. We kept the exonic
SNVs called by any two callers among MUTECT v1.7, VarScan v.2.3.8, and Strelka v.2.9.2 and indels called by any two callers among
VarScan v.2.3.8, Strelka v.2, and Pindel v.0.2.5. For the merged SNVs and indels, we applied a 14X and 8X coverage cutoff for tumor
and normal, separately. We also ﬁltered SNVs and indels by a minimal variant allele frequency (VAF) of 0.05 in tumors and a maximal
VAF of 0.02 in normal samples. We ﬁltered any SNV within 10bp of an indel found in the same tumor sample. Finally, we rescued the
rare mutations with VAF of [0.015, 0.05) in ccRCC driver genes based on the gene consensus list.1
Somatic mutation calling (pipeline from Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard)
In parallel, patient whole-exome sequencing (WES) data for matched tumor/normal samples were analyzed using the Getz Lab’s pro-
duction hg38 WES characterization pipeline. The hg38 characterization pipeline runs on the Terra cloud-based analysis platform
(https://terra.bio/). This pipeline is the Getz Lab’s standard computational workﬂow, and the analysis steps are organized into ﬁve
modules: (1) DNA Sequence Data Quality Control (including GATK4’s CalculateContamination [ver GATK 4.1.4.1] and GATK4 Picard
tools [ver GATK 4.0.5.1]). (2) Somatic Copy Number Analysis (GATK4 Best Practices Workﬂow [ver GATK 4.1.4.1]). (3) Somatic Variant
Discovery, which includes the discovery of single-nucleotide variants (SNVs) and insertions/deletions (indels), using MuTect103 and
Manta+Strelka v2.102,108 Next, deTiN v1.8.994 is run to account for and rescue tumor-in-normal contamination. The resulting SNV and
indel VCFs are each run through the GATK4 Funcotator (ver GATK 4.1.4.1). (4) Post-Discovery Filtering, which employs a collection of
ﬁlters to remove alignment artifacts, germline variants, and common sequencing artifacts that occur in normal panels. (5) Merging of
adjacent somatic Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNPs) into di-nucleotide polymorphisms (DNPs), trinucleotide polymorphisms
(TNPs), and Oligo-nucleotide polymorphisms (ONPs).
Somatic mutation callset harmonization (pipeline from Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard)
The per-patient variant calls employed by the CPTAC PanCan working group are derived from the harmonization of variant calls made
independently by the Broad and Washthe U teams. First, we ﬁlter calls outside of the inosine chemical erasing (ICE) interval (Genomics
Platform at the Broad Institute) and apply a ‘‘panel-of-normals’’ built from aggregating CPTAC and TCGA cohorts for consistency be-
tween the two pipelines. In addition, to account for differences in the two mutation call sets, we: (i) removed all calls with Variant Allele
Frequency (VAF)<0.05 from both pipelines and rescued only high conﬁdent calls and (ii) long ONPs were collapsed to shorter ONPs by
imposing a more stringent merging criterion that requires a 2bp gap length at max. Next, we used Asymtools2113 to identify a sequencing
artifact affecting CPTAC2 whole-exome sequencing. We then corrected for the sequencing artifact by ranking context-speciﬁc muta-
tions by their allelic fractions. Finally, the functional impact of harmonized calls was annotated using GATK Funcotator.
Germline variant calling and pathogenicity classiﬁcation
Germline variant calling was performed using the GermlineWrapper v1.1 pipeline, which implements multiple tools for detecting
germline INDELs and SNVs. Germline SNVs were identiﬁed using VarScan v2.3.8111 (with parameters:-min-var-freq 0.10, -p-value
0.10, -min-coverage 3, -strand-ﬁlter 1) operating on a mpileup stream produced by samtools v1.2 (with parameters: -q 1 -Q 13)
and GATK v4.0.0.0114 using its haplotype caller in single-sample mode with duplicate and unmapped reads removed and retaining
calls with a minimum quality threshold of 10. Germline INDELs were called using VarScan, GATK, and Pindel104 (version 0.2.5b9, with
default parameters except -m 6, -w 1, excluding centromere regions (genome.ucsc.edu)). INDELs were required to be called by at
least two out of the three callers. All resulting variants were limited to coding regions of full-length transcripts obtained from Ensembl
release 100 plus additional two base pairs ﬂanking each exon to cover splice sites. We required variants to have Allelic Depth (AD) R
5 reads for the alternative allele and ﬁltered out any INDELs longer than 100bps. Germline variants passing ﬁlters were then annotated
using the Ensembl Variant effect Predictor (VEP)115 (version 100 with default parameters, except -everything) and their pathogenicity
was determined with our automated pipeline CharGer92 (version 0.5.4), which classiﬁes germline variants based on guidelines pub-
lished by the American College of Medical Genetics (ACMG).116 Brieﬂy, CharGer applies 12 pathogenic and four benign evidence
levels using information from several databases, such as gnomAD and ClinVAr, and in silico tools, such as SIFT117 and Polyphen.118
Further details on implementation, scores of each evidence level, and parameters used are the same as those in our previous
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Cell 186, 3921–3944.e1–e12, August 31, 2023
e3
Article

pan-cancer TCGA germline study.92,119 Variants classiﬁed by CharGer were then ﬁltered for rare variants with minor allele frequency
(MAF) % 0.05% in gnomAD r.2.1.1120 and/or The 1000 Genomes Project.121 Further, we used bam-readcount v0.8 for reference and
alternative alleles quantiﬁcation (with parameters: -q 10 -b 15) in both normal and tumor samples and required at least ﬁve counts for
the alternative allele and 20% variant allele frequency (VAF) in both tumor and normal samples. Variants passing these ﬁlters were =
manually reviewed with the Integrative Genomics Viewer (IGV) software (version 2.12.3) using = tumor and normal data.
Copy number variant calling
Genomic data post-processing and GISTIC (pipeline from Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard)
The Genomic Identiﬁcation of Signiﬁcant Targets in Cancer (GISTIC2.0) algorithm95 was used to identify signiﬁcantly ampliﬁed or
deleted focal-level and arm-level events, with q-value<0.25 considered signiﬁcant (default parameters were used).
WGS copy number variant calling (pipeline from Washington University in St Louis)
We used BIC-seq2,122 a read-depth-based CNA calling algorithm, to detect somatic copy number alteration (CNAs) from the WGS
data of tumors. Brieﬂy, BIC-seq2 divides genomic regions into disjoint bins and counts uniquely aligned reads in each bin. Then, it
combines neighboring bins into genomic segments with similar copy numbers iteratively based on Bay’sian Information Criteria (BIC),
a statistical criterion measuring a statistical model’s ﬁtness and complexity. We used paired-sample CNA calling that takes samples
as input and detects genomic regions with different copy numbers between the two samples. We used a bin size of 100 bp and a
lambda of 3 (a smoothing parameter for CNA segmentation). We recommend calling segments as copy, gain, or loss when their log2
copy ratios are larger than 0.2 or smaller than 0.2, respectively (according to the BIC-seq publication).
DNA methylation microarray processing
Raw methylation idat ﬁles were downloaded from CPTAC DCC and GDC. Beta values of CpG loci were reported after functional
normalization, quality check, common SNP ﬁltering, and probe annotation using the Li Ding Lab’s methylation pipeline v1.1
https://github.com/ding-lab/cptac_methylation.
Gene-level DNA methylation data were generated using the beta values of all probes harboring in the islands of promoter and
5 UTR regions of the genes. Samples with a missing rate>10% across all probes were excluded, the mean and median levels
were calculated, and the analyses were performed separately on the discovery cohort of seven cancer types. For ﬁve cancer types
(ccRCC, LUAD, LSCC, HNSCC, and PDAC) that have DNA methylation data in both NAT and tumor samples, consensus clustering
analysis was performed as a quality control procedure to evaluate the separation of clusters on NAT vs. tumor samples. The misclas-
siﬁed samples were checked for clustering uncertainty and sample labeling. We identiﬁed aberrant DNA methylation associated with
transcriptional and/or translational changes using the published RESET pipeline.123 Within the promoter region (TSS +- 300 bp).
RNA data processing and quantiﬁcation
We obtained the gene-level read count, Fragments Per Kilobase of transcript per Million mapped reads (FPKM), and FPKM Upper
Quartile (FPKM-UQ) values by following the GDC’s RNA-Seq pipeline (Expression mRNA Pipeline) https://docs.gdc.cancer.gov/
Data/Bioinformatics_Pipelines/Expression_mRNA_Pipeline/, except running the quantiﬁcation tools in the stranded mode. We
used HTSeq v0.11.2100 to calculate the gene-level stranded read count (parameters: -r pos -f bam -a 10 -s reverse -t exon -i gene_id
-m intersection-nonempty –nonunique=none) using GENCODE v22 (Ensembl v79) annotation downloaded from GDC (gencode.ge-
ne.info.v22.tsv). The read count was then converted to FPKM and FPKM-UQ using the formula described in GDC’s Expression
mRNA Pipeline documentation.
RNA fusion detection
We used three callers, STAR-Fusion v1.5.0,107 INTEGRATE v0.2.6,101 and EricScript v0.5.5,99 to call consensus fusion/chimeric
events in our samples. Calls by each tool using tumor and normal RNA-Seq data were then merged into a single ﬁle, and extensive
ﬁltering was done. As STAR-Fusion has higher sensitivity, calls made by this tool with higher supporting evidence (deﬁned by fusion
fragments per million total reads, or FFPM>0.1) were required, or a given fusion must be reported by at least two callers. We then
removed the fusions present in our panel of blacklisted or normal fusions, which included uncharacterized genes, immunoglobulin
genes, mitochondrial genes, and others, as well as fusions from the same gene or paralog genes and fusions reported in TCGA
normal samples,124 GTEx tissues (reported in STAR-Fusion output), and non-cancer cell studies.125 Finally, we removed normal fu-
sions from the tumor fusions to curate the ﬁnal set.
Cell-type annotation on differentially expressed markers
We applied a comprehensive analysis strategy to annotate the cell-type expression of differentially expressed markers. As the pri-
mary approach, we utilized the published expression data at the single-cell resolution16,88–90 and separated the populations into
three main categories (e.g., Tumor, Immune, and Stromal). Differentially expressed genes corresponding to each category were iden-
tiﬁed by the FindMarkers function in Seurat.126 Wilcoxon rank-sum test was used. log2FC>1 and q-value<0.05 were used to ﬁlter
DEGs and classify the differentially expressed markers into Tumor (T), Immune (I), Stromal (S), or Mixed (M) categories. For those
that were not quantiﬁed in the data described above or did not pass through the cutoffs, we applied secondary annotation by per-
forming the correlation analysis between the marker expression and cell-type-signature (e.g., ESTIMATE127 and xCell112) and applied
ll
OPEN ACCESS
e4
Cell 186, 3921–3944.e1–e12, August 31, 2023
Article

the cutoffs of correlation difference>0.5 and q-value<0.05. For example, if a marker has signiﬁcant correlations (e.g., q-value<0.05)
with tumor purity of 0.7, with an immune score of -0.3, and with a stromal score of -0.05, it will be considered as the category of (T).
Moreover, for the small subset that was not evaluable by the primary and secondary annotation, we referred to the Human Protein
Atlas for their expression proﬁles as a part of the multi-layer annotations.
Tumor microenvironment inference
The ESTIMATE scores reﬂecting the overall immune and stromal inﬁltration were calculated by the R package ESTIMATE127 using the
normalized RNA expression data (FPKM-UQ).
Cell type enrichment deconvolution using gene expression
The abundance of each cell type was inferred by the xCell web tool,112 which performed the cell type enrichment analysis from gene
expression data for 64 immune and stromal cell types (default xCell signature). xCell is a gene signatures-based method learned from
thousands of pure cell types from various sources. We used the FPKM-UQ expression matrix as the input of xCell. xCell generated an
immune score per sample that integrates the enrichment scores of B cells, CD4+ T-cells, CD8+ T-cells, DC, eosinophils, macro-
phages, monocytes, mast cells, neutrophils, and NK cells; a micro-environment score which was the sum of the immune score
and stroma score. Besides, we applied CIBERSORTx93 to compute immune cell fractions from bulk gene expression data.
Survival analysis
The R package ‘‘survival’’ was used to perform survival analysis. The Kaplan-Meier curve of overall survival was used to compare the
prognosis among subtypes (function survﬁt). Log-rank test (from the R package survminer) was used to test the differential survival
outcomes between categorical variables. The standard multivariate Cox-proportional hazard modeling was applied to estimate the
hazard ratio among subtypes (function coxph).
Ancestry prediction using SNPs from 1000 genomes project
We used a reference panel of genotypes and a clustering based on principal components to identify likely ancestry. We selected
107,765 coding SNPs with a minor allele frequency>0.02 from the ﬁnal phase release of The 1000 Genomes Project.128 From this
set of loci, we measured the depth and allele counts of each sample in our cohort using bam-readcount v0.8.0. Genotypes were
then called for each sample based on the following criteria: 0/0 if reference count R 8 and alternate count<4; 0/1 if reference count
R 4 and alternate count R 4; 1/1 if reference count<4 and alternate count R 8; and./. (missing) otherwise. After excluding markers
with missingness>5%, 70,968 markers were kept for analysis. We performed PCA on the 1000 Genomes samples to identify the top
20 principal components. We then projected our cohort onto the 20-dimensional space representing the 1000 Genomes data. We
then trained a random forest classiﬁer with the 1000 Genomes dataset using these 20 principal components. The 1000 Genomes
dataset was split 80/20 for training and validation, respectively. On the validation dataset, our classiﬁer achieved 99.6% accuracy.
We then used the ﬁtted classiﬁer to predict the likely ancestry of our cohort. Each prediction ﬁle contains classiﬁcation probabilities
for each sample for ﬁve ancestries (EUS - European, EAS - East Asian, SAS - South Asian, AFR - African, AMR - American Admixture)
GitHub: https://github.com/ding-lab/ancestry.
MSI prediction
MSI scores were calculated by MSIsensor (https://github.com/ding-lab/msisensor) and interpreted as the percentage of microsat-
ellite sites (with deep enough sequencing coverage) that have a lesion. Samples with an MSI score>3.5 are classiﬁed as "MSI-high"
and the rest will be classiﬁed as "MSS." An intermediate class with 1.0<=score<=3.5 can be deﬁned as "MSI-low."
HLA typing and neoantigen prediction
The wild-type/variant protein sequences are obtained from the Refseq database. We constructed different epitope lengths
(8-11-mer) from the translated protein sequence. Each sample’s HLA type comes from OptiType prediction. We predicted
the binding afﬁnity between epitopes and the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) using NetMHC4.129 Epitopes with binding
afﬁnity % 500nM, also not present in the wild-type transcript, are reported as neoantigens.
Oncogenicity annotation
OncoKB oncogenicity annotation
OncoKB is an extensive knowledge base that curates the literature on whether speciﬁc alterations are either known to be oncogenic
or are likely oncogenic.71 To utilize the most up-to-date annotations, we used the OncoKB API through their Python-based command
line interface (https://github.com/oncokb/oncokb-annotator) for point mutations (MafAnnotator.py), copy number alterations
(CnaAnnotator.py) and gene fusions (FusionAnnotator.py). To obtain cancer type-speciﬁc oncogenicity annotations, we provided
the corresponding cancer type for each mutation using standardized OncoTree code names,130 which only differed from CPTAC
code names for three cancer types (LUSC instead of LSCC, HNSC instead of HNSCC, and PAAD instead of PDAC). Somatic point
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Cell 186, 3921–3944.e1–e12, August 31, 2023
e5
Article

mutations were annotated based on the genomic change in the MAF ﬁle as input. For copy number alterations, OncoKB directly used
the GISTIC 2.0 results as input. Lastly, for gene fusions, only the identity of the genes in a fusion pair was provided since OncoKB
does not consider breakpoints.
Annotating putative driver missense mutations
As the primary goal of our study was to identify the proteomic correlates of driver alterations and not to identify driver events per se, to
explore the consequences of driver events, we deﬁned putative driver alterations by combining two curated knowledge bases
(OncoKB71 and Cancer Gene Census131) with computational predictions. We focused on 299 cancer driver genes,1 supplemented
with known oncogenic mutations and computational predictions of driver missense mutations by six methods (Figures S1F–S1H),
known mutational hotspots for in-frame indels, and manual curation of less-studied alterations, such as gene fusions. This strategy
identiﬁed 3,083 somatic point mutations, 2,311 copy number events, and 49 gene fusions as putatively oncogenic for downstream
analysis (Figures S1I–S1L; Table S1).
1,289 missense mutations labeled as ‘‘Oncogenic’’ or ‘‘Likely Oncogenic’’ by OncoKB were considered putative driver mutations.
However, because existing annotations like OncoKB often miss rare driver missense mutations, we augmented our analysis with the
union of computational predictions from six different methods (CHASMplus tissue-speciﬁc and pan-cancer models, BoostDM,
CTAT-cancer, CTAT-general, and protein structure hotspot), which have complementary strengths (see section: computational
methods to predict driver missense mutations). We added the union of computational predictions because all methods were highly
conservative in predicting driver missense mutations (Figure S1F), highly consistent with each other (Figure S1G), and most missense
mutations predicted by multiple methods were already annotated by OncoKB as (likely) oncogenic variants (Figure S1H). This re-
sulted in 1,814 candidate driver missense mutations for further analysis. This number (n = 1,814) results from the union of all muta-
tions annotated as ‘‘Oncogenic’’ or ‘‘Likely Oncogenic’’ in OncoKB (n = 1,289) with any mutation identiﬁed by any of the six compu-
tational methods (n = 1,699).
Computational methods to predict driver missense mutations
CHASMplus. CHASMplus is a random forest machine learning algorithm that predicts driver missense mutations based on 95 fea-
tures.4 Given the larger sample size, a CHASMplus model was trained on data from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA)132 rather than
directly from CPTAC. Because driver missense mutations may be highly cancer type-speciﬁc or found at a low frequency across
multiple cancer types, predictions from both a cancer type-speciﬁc model and a pan-cancer model were used. CHASMplus scores
and p-values were obtained through OpenCRAVAT,133 which can notably score missense mutations even if they were never found in
TCGA. Missense mutations were regarded as putative driver missense mutations if the Benjamini-Hochberg FDR was less than 0.01.
BoostDM. We downloaded the BoostDM5 predictions for almost all possible mutations in 250 gene-tissue-speciﬁc pairs from the
IntOgen website (www.intogen.org/boostdm). This tool, BoostDM, is a machine learning algorithm that can predict, in a tissue-spe-
ciﬁc manner, whether a mutation in a cancer gene is likely to be oncogenic or not. We kept only the gene models that matched the
cancer types studied in CPTAC and labeled each mutation according to the boost_dm ﬂag of the model. This ﬂag is true if the model
predicts the mutation as oncogenic and false otherwise. We then matched the CPTAC mutations to the speciﬁc isoform analyzed by
BoostDM.
CTAT-cancer, CTAT-general, and protein structure hotspots. The results of three driver missense methods (CTAT-cancer, CTAT-
general, and protein structure hotspots) were obtained from our previous analysis of TCGA.1 CTAT-population is a consensus of four
machine learning methods (SIFT,134 PolyPhen2,118 VEST,135 and MutationAssessor136) that predict the pathogenicity of missense
mutations by scoring each variant using a PCA-based strategy. A drawback of CTAT-general was that it was not tailored for analyzing
somatic mutations. To overcome this weakness, using a similar PCA-based strategy, CTAT-cancer is a consensus of four machine
learning methods (CanDrA,137 fathmm,138 CHASM,139 and TransFIC140) that predicts the oncogenicity of missense mutations, rather
than general pathogenicity. Lastly, structural clustering is a consensus of at least two out of four clustering algorithms (HotMAPS,10
HotSpot3D,141 3DHotSpot.org,142 and e-Driver3D9) that identify mutations that cluster in 3D protein structures.
Annotating putative driver in-frame indels
To overcome the limited number of computational approaches to predict whether an in-frame indel is likely a cancer driver mutation,
we took a multi-stage strategy. Similar to missense mutations, we ﬁrst included all ‘‘Oncogenic’’ or ‘‘Likely Oncogenic’’ mutations
from OncoKB as putative driver mutations. We also included any in-frame indels in mutational hotspots from Chang et al.143 The ﬁrst
two steps resulted in the annotation of 89 in-frame indels as putative drivers. Lastly, we manually reviewed the literature for 176 in-
frame indels that were found in 299 previously implicated driver genes, which resulted in the rescue of 16 additional putative drivers in
frame indels based on proximity to similar mutations known to have a functional effect in experimental assays (Table S1).
Annotating driver putative Loss-of-Function (pLOF) mutations
Putative Loss-of-Function mutations (including nonsense, frameshift indels, translation start site, and stop-loss mutations) are
commonly regarded as driver mutations if they occur in known tumor suppressor genes.144 OncoKB utilizes this rule of thumb in
a cancer-type-agnostic manner for annotating pLOF mutations as oncogenic.71 However, we found such a strategy likely resulted
in elevated false positive driver mutation calls, as evidenced by a substantial correlation between gene length and the frequency
of pLOF mutations (Figure S1D). We, therefore, annotated pLOF mutations based on cancer type-speciﬁc annotations of TSGs using
the 20/20+ method.145 Brieﬂy, we regarded a driver gene as a TSG for a cancer type if it was at least nominally statistically signiﬁcant
for having a high TSG score (p-value<0.05) based on data from TCGA.1 Notably, the cancer type-speciﬁc TSG annotations eliminated
the correlation between gene length and pLOF mutation frequency (Figure S1I), suggesting that most false positives were removed.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
e6
Cell 186, 3921–3944.e1–e12, August 31, 2023
Article

Annotating driver copy number alterations
Copy Number Alterations (CNA) were summarized at the gene level through GISTIC 2.0, with only ‘‘high-level’’ ampliﬁcations and
deletions used for further analysis, which already adjusts for broad arm-level differences that may not be speciﬁc to the gene. Driver
CNAs were deﬁned fromtwo sources (OncoKB and the Cancer Gene Census) that consider whether the directionality of the CNA
(ampliﬁcation vs. deletion) is consistent with the gene’s known role in tumorigenesis (oncogene vs. tumor suppressor gene, respec-
tively). For OncoKB, only CNAs annotated as ‘‘Oncogenic’’ were considered drivers. For Cancer Gene Census,131 we regarded any
high-level ampliﬁcation/deletion ina CGC gene annotated as appropriate for ampliﬁcation/deletion, respectively, as a putative driver
CNA. Because both annotations from OncoKB and CGC were highly consistent (Figure S1K), we regarded a CNA in a gene as a pu-
tative driver if either of the approaches indicated it.
Driver annotation of gene fusions
We regarded fusions annotated as ‘‘Oncogenic’’ or ‘‘Likely Oncogenic’’ fusions from OncoKB as putative drivers. To reduce the po-
tential for passenger fusion events being erroneously labeled as a driver, we only used OncoKB annotations where the precise gene
fusion that contained both genes was known to be likely/oncogenic rather than imprecisely deﬁned gene fusions (e.g., ALK fusions
without a deﬁned fusion partner). We then manually reviewed cases to rescue oncogenic fusions where a known oncogene driven by
fusion events may have had a non-canonical fusion partner. Given the importance of kinase fusions in cancer,124 we focused on ki-
nase fusions that resulted in an in-frame fusion event with the kinase domain intact. To do this, we used agfusion to annotate the
consequence of gene fusions on the protein,146 including in-frame status and protein domains that were lost or retained. Notably,
as expected, fusions containing a known oncogene were enriched for in-frame fusion events (Figure S1L), which was not the
case for tumor suppressor genes. This resulted in the inclusion of 49 fusion events as putative drivers across CPTAC.
Normalization of protein abundance by RNA expression
To analyze the cis-effects that happen speciﬁcally at the protein level rather than iption level, we ﬁrst performed a linear regression
between RNA expression (log2(FPKM+1)) and protein abundance of each gene using the Python statsmodels package. We then
computed the Pearson residual for each sample, which normalizes the difference between the observed protein abundance and ex-
pected value based on RNA expression (residual) by their standard deviation. The cis-effect analysis (see section: Genetic driver al-
terations’ cis impact on RNA, proteome, and PTMs) was then repeated using the Pearson residual rather than protein abundance
directly.
Calculation of relative solvent accessibility of amino acid residues
Relative Solvent Accessibility (RSA) is a continuous score to characterize whether an amino acid is buried vs. accessible on the pro-
tein surface. RSA is calculated as the fraction of the surface area of an amino acid residue that is solvent-accessible based on an
available protein structure. To systematically calculate RSA across the proteome, we used predicted protein structures from
AlphaFold (version 1, downloaded from https://alphafold.ebi.ac.uk/).147 Using default parameters, RSA values were computed using
DSSP148 via the BioPython API using default parameters. Notably, as RSA depends on normalizing the accessible surface area by a
theoretical maximum for each residue, the BioPython implementation uses the approach by Sander and Rost.149
Protein-protein interaction databases
We integrated protein-protein interactions from the following sources: STRING150 (minimum score above 700), MINT,151 BioGrid,152
IntAct,153 CORUM154 and the unbiased experimental interactome.155 While the union of all these databases had 710,748 interactions,
for the rest of the analyses, we only kept those interactions described in at least three databases (n=14,768).
Driver mutation interaction term regression model for protein-protein interactions
As outlined previously, protein-protein interactions supported by multiple databases (see above) displayed higher protein co-expres-
sion than compared to random protein pairs. To statistically test whether putative driver mutations may alter protein co-expression of
the driver gene (g) with a known PPI partner, we used a linear regression model with a non-linear interaction term. Interaction terms
are a widely used technique to capture when the relationship between the outcome (e.g., protein abundance of a PPI partner) and an
independent variable (e.g., protein abundance of a cancer driver gene) depends on a third variable (e.g., mutation status).156 After
including additional covariates, this resulted in the following regression model to learn the b coefﬁcients:
Y = b0 + b1Xg + b2Mg + b3

Xg  Mg

+ b4P + b5C + e
(Equation 1)
where Y is a (n x 1) vector representing the protein abundance of the PPI partner, X is a vector representing the protein abundance
of the cancer driver gene of interest (g), M is a binary vector indicating the driver mutation status for that particular driver gene (g) in a
tumor sample, (X*M) is the interaction term composed of the element-wise product of X and M, and the tumor purity (P) calculated by
ESTIMATE127 was also included as a covariate. For pan-cancer analyses, cancer type was one-hot encoded and was included as an
additional covariate (C). Lastly, the error ε is assumed to be normally distributed with a constant variance s.
To assess for non-zero b coefﬁcients, indicating a potential trans-effect of a driver mutation on a PPI partner, we performed a Wald
test for b2 and b3, which resulted in p-values P2 and P3. To summarize the overall impact of the driver mutation, we then used Fisher’s
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Cell 186, 3921–3944.e1–e12, August 31, 2023
e7
Article

method to obtain a single combined p-value. Fisher’s method assumes the log-transformed p-values follow a chi-squared distribu-
tion with 2*(number of hypotheses, |K|) degrees of freedom.
c2
2jKj   2
X
k ˛ K
logðPkÞ =  2 logðP2Þ  2 logðP3Þ
(Equation 2)
This procedure was applied for all genes with at least ﬁve putative driver mutations and all PPI partners that are supported by at
least three databases. Only proteins with less than 50% missing values were tested. The Benjamin-Hochberg false discovery rate
(FDR) approach was then applied, and all events with a q-value less than 0.1 were deemed statistically signiﬁcant. Notably, repeating
the same analysis using RNA instead of protein abundance levels, we could only recover approximately half of all correlations be-
tween interacting pairs (52% on average across the ten cancer types), ranging from 44% in BRCA to 73% in COAD.
Robustness and subsampling analysis of the interaction term regression model for protein-protein interactions
While including a product interaction term in a regression model is well established, at least two factors could adversely impact the
proper control of the false discovery rate for our data in practice. First, p-values from the Wald test may not be independent and there-
fore lead to an inﬂated p-value estimate when combined using Fisher’s method. Secondly, protein abundance outliers may have high
leverage in the regression model and potentially drive spurious associations. To assess the robustness of the interaction term regres-
sion model, we randomly permuted the samples labeled as driver mutant (M vector) in our pan-cancer analysis driver mutant labeled
samples permuted, and all statistically signiﬁcant trans-effects would be false positives. Consistent with the interaction term regres-
sion model controlling the Type I error, QQ plots show that the permuted labels closely match the null hypothesis of a uniform p-value
distribution (Figure S3I). In contrast, on the observed (unpermuted) data, the interaction term regression model identiﬁes events with
p-values much lower than expected based on the null hypothesis. We then repeated the permutation 1,000 times to generate a dis-
tribution of the number of signiﬁcant events (Figure S3J). We found that the mean number of false positives from the permutation
analysis closely matched the estimated FDR threshold (4 mean false positives, 51 events as statistically signiﬁcant). This suggests
that the interaction term regression model was appropriately controlling the Type I error rate.
We next performed a subsampling analysis to identify how sample size impacted our PanCan analysis. To do this, we randomly
subsampled tumors without replacement for sizes ranging from 2% to 100% of the full data. For each subsampled dataset, we
repeated the analysis described in the section interaction term regression model for protein-protein interactions. After 100 sub-
sampled analyses, we found a roughly linear increase in the number of signiﬁcant events as the sample size increased (Figure S3K).
Copy number mediation analysis
Because copy number events may impact more than one gene, a central question is whether the protein product of a particular gene
might mediate the downstream impact on a phenotype. To address this question, we posed the problem in terms of a mediation anal-
ysis where the copy number status of an arbitrary Gene A within the CNA is assessed for impact on the expression level of Protein A,
which would then have a trans-impact on the expression level of Protein B (Figure 3F). To restrain testing all potential pairs of A and B,
we restrict our analysis to those with protein interaction support from at least three databases (see the section titled ‘‘Protein-protein
interaction databases’’). In causal inference theory, mediation analysis is typically formulated in terms of exposure (X), mediator (M),
covariates (C), and outcome (Y). For our application, X is a binary variable indicating a putative oncogenic CNA event for Gene A, M is
the expression level of Protein A, C is a one-hot encoding of the cancer type, and Y is a vector of the expression level of Protein B. One
commonly used statistical approach to reject the null hypothesis of no mediation is the product-of-coefﬁcients method,157 which
leverages the following two regression equations:
b
M = c
h1 + baX + bz1 C
(Equation 3)
bY = c
h2 + btX + bb M + bz2 C
(Equation 4)
where d
h1  2 are intercept terms, d
z1  2 are coefﬁcients for the covariates, and ba and bb are the estimated coefﬁcients of interest. In
the product-of-coefﬁcients method, the product of the two terms (babb) is then tested for being non-zero. This is usually done by
repeated bootstrapping or dividing by the standard error of babb by a ﬁrst-order approximation and comparison to a standard normal
distribution.157 A more recent approach to mediation analysis is to use a natural effect model that reformulates Equation two (e.g.,
Equation 4) in terms of counterfactuals. For the CNA mediation analysis, we, therefore, used a natural effect model in the MedFlex R
package using the imputation-based approach,158 which, unlike the product-of-coefﬁcient method, handles missing values in the
outcome variable. To assess whether the null hypothesis of no mediation could be rejected, we used a Wald test based on the stan-
dard error estimate by the sandwich estimator.
Phosphorylation interaction term regression model for protein-protein interactions
We also statistically tested whether phosphorylation levels at protein interfaces may inﬂuence protein co-expression of the phos-
phorylated protein (p) with a known PPI partner. We ﬁrst identiﬁed phosphorylation sites at interaction domains on proteins using
ll
OPEN ACCESS
e8
Cell 186, 3921–3944.e1–e12, August 31, 2023
Article

3DMapper, a tool that locates protein positions on protein interfaces (https://github.com/vicruiser/3Dmapper). Cross-referencing
these interface-mapped sites with known protein regulatory phosphorylation sites documented in PhosphoSitePlus159 revealed
that 58 of the 212 total interface phosphorylation sites detected by 3DMapper are, indeed, involved in regulatory mechanisms
according to PhosphoSitePlus annotations. To binarize the extent of phosphorylation levels for more straightforward testing, we con-
verted interface phosphorylation levels to 1 for patients with phosphorylation levels in the upper quartile, 0 for patients with phosphor-
ylation levels in the middle 50% of measures at the site, and -1 for patients with lower quartile phosphorylation levels. We used a linear
regression model with a non-linear interaction term, similar to what was implemented for the driver mutation PPI analysis, to ask
whether patients with high phosphorylation at a given site exhibited different protein-protein correlations from patients with interme-
diate or low phosphorylation levels at the same site. After including additional covariates, this resulted in the following regression
model to learn the b coefﬁcients:
Y = b0 + b1Xp + b2Mp + b3

Xg  Php

+ b4P + b5C + e
(Equation 5)
where Y is a (n x 1) vector representing the protein abundance of the PPI partner, X is a vector representing the protein abundance
of the phosphorylated cancer driver of interest (p), Ph is a binary vector indicating the binary-converted phosphorylation levels for a
given interface site in that particular driver protein (p) in a tumor sample, (X*Ph) is the interaction term composed of the element-wise
product of X and Ph, and the tumor purity (P) calculated by ESTIMATE127 was also included as a covariate. For pan-cancer analyses,
cancer type was one-hot encoded and was included as an additional covariate (C). Lastly, the error ε is assumed to be normally
distributed with a constant variance s.
Regression analysis of neoantigens and inferred immune inﬁltration
To analyze factors that may inﬂuence the immunogenicity of neoantigens, we examined the correlation of the number of neoantigens
(log2 transformed) within a tumor (neoantigen burden) with inferred T-cell inﬁltration. Two methods for inferring CD8 T-cell inﬁltration
weretested, CIBERSORTxabsolute160andacytotoxic tlymphocyte (CTL)scorecomposedofthe averageexpressionofseveral marker
genes (CD8A, CD8B, GZMA, GZMB, and PRF1).161 At the pan-cancer level controlling for cancer type, both methods were signiﬁcantly
correlatedwith neoantigenburden(CIBERSORT absoluteCD8 T-cell:p-value=0.002,CTL: p-value=4e-4;Wald test),withfourindividual
cancer types (COAD, UCEC, LUAD, and BRCA) being nominally signiﬁcant in both analyses. To analyze whether driver alterations may
alterthecorrelationbetweenneoantigenburdenandinferredT-cellinﬁltration,weusedalinearregressionmodelwithaninteractionterm
between driver alteration status and neoantigen burden and inferred T-cell inﬁltration to analyze whether driver alterations may alter the
correlation between neoantigen burden and inferred T-cell inﬁltration. Like the interaction term regression model in the section ‘‘Inter-
action term regression model for protein-protein interactions’’, we assessed statistical signiﬁcance using a Wald test (q-value<0.1). To
assess whether consideration of the protein / RNA expression of a gene improves the correlation of neoantigen burden with CTL, we
recalculatedneoantigen burden basedonpredicted neoantigensfoundingenes withat leastcertainlevels ofRNA orproteinabundance
in each tumor. To assess whether this improved the correlation with CTL, we performed a likelihood ratio test that compared a model
with the original neoantigen burden feature to a model that also included expression-ﬁltered neoantigen burden.
Analysis of RB1 oncogenic alterations
To further analyze the impact of oncogenic alterations in RB1, we performed three downstream analyses on expression data (RNA-
seq and proteomics), ChIP-seq data162–164 and crispr screens (DepMAP). First, we performed differential expression analysis of
putatively oncogenic alterations in RB1, either point mutations or CNAs, versus wild-type by using a linear regression model that con-
trols for tumor type and tumor purity (ESTIMATE). A Wald test assessed statistical signiﬁcance at a q-value<0.1. Differential expres-
sion was done separately for RNA-seq (based on log2 FPKM values) and proteomics. Secondly, given that RB1 is known to aid tran-
scriptional repression of target genes,56 we next examined RB1 ChIP-seq from three different studies.162–164 We downloaded
uniformly processed ChIP-seq coverage ﬁles from CistromeDB (ids: 101666, 1872, and 49416),165 as well as regulatory potential
(RP) scores166 that describe how close ChIP-seq peaks are to the transcriptional start site of a gene. We then normalized the RP
scores based on the maximum RP observed in each dataset. Lastly, we analyzed which genes might be preferentially essential in
RB1-altered cell lines from large-scale CRISPR screens. We downloaded quantiﬁed essentiality scores and mutation calls from Dep-
MAP.60 Given the absence of CNA calls for deletions, we only used point mutations that were putatively loss-of-function (i.e.,
nonsense, frameshift indels, etc.) in RB1. Using a linear regression model that adjusts for cell lineage, we then used a Wald test
to assess whether RB1 alteration status was associated with differential gene dependencies (q-value<0.1).
Drug connectivity
Differentially Expressed Proteins (DEPs) were identiﬁed using Limma (trend=True) between various clinical, driver gene mutation sta-
tus, and pan-cancer proteogenomic groups after ﬁltering for proteins with adjusted p-value<0.05. The identiﬁed DEPs were then
ﬁltered for gene symbols measured in the L1000 assay (978 landmark genes + 9122 Best Inferred Genes). These driver-gene-speciﬁc
signatures were input to calculate normalized weighted connectivity scores (WTCS) against the Library of Integrated Network-Based
Cellular Signatures (LINCS) L1000 perturbation-response signatures. The scores were computed using the sig_queryl1k_tool pipe-
line (https://hub.docker.com/u/cmap) and the LINCS L1000 Level 5 compound (trt_cp) signatures from CLUE (https://clue.io, ‘‘2021
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Cell 186, 3921–3944.e1–e12, August 31, 2023
e9
Article

Release’’). The resulting normalized connectivity scores were summarized across cell lines using the maximum quantile of all the
scores of the same compound (Qhi=67, Qlow=33) as previously described.57 The corresponding compound metadata were obtained
from CLUE (clue.io, ‘‘Expanded CMap LINCS Resource 2020 Release’’) and were used to ﬁlter and identify compounds with existing
clinical annotations (have been evaluated in at least a Phase I trial). The normalized drug connectivity scores of each driver gene
signature were then used to calculate individual MOA and Drug Target enrichment scores by applying the Gene Set Enrichment Anal-
ysis of the ‘‘fgsea’’ R package and by utilizing the compounds’ respective MOA and Drug Target Annotations from CLUE.
Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) on signature gene coefﬁcients
We submitted the signature gene coefﬁcients to Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) on a subset of the GO terms that reduced
redundancy between pathways while retaining the gene coverage.167 The MSigDB c5 v7.4 gene set was ﬁrst ﬁltered to remove terms
with less than 15 or more than 200 genes, and reduction was carried out using the authors’ implementation (https://github.com/
RuthStoney/set-cover-and-set-packing-to-reduce-redundancy-in-pathway-data) with unweighted coverage, resulting in a reduced
set of 698 terms. After GSEA on the reduced set, 633 terms with enrichment scores were clustered based on term semantics using
the SimplifyEnrichment R package (Gu and Hu¨ bschmann, 2021), and the term groups were manually annotated.
The Kinase Library enrichment analysis
Full description of the substrate speciﬁcities atlas of the Ser/Thr kinome can be found in the KL paper.109 The phosphorylation sites
detected in this study were scored by all the characterized kinases (303 S/T kinases), and their ranks in the known phosphoproteome
score distribution were determined as described above (percentile score). For every non-duplicate, singly phosphorylated site, ki-
nases ranked within the top 15 kinases for the S/T kinases were considered biochemically predicted kinases for that phosphorylation
site. Towards assessing a kinase motif enrichment, we compared the percentage of phosphorylation sites for which each kinase was
predicted among the downregulated/upregulated phosphorylation sites (sites with a q-value of 0.1 or below) versus the percentage
of biochemically favored phosphorylation sites for that kinase within the set of unregulated sites in this study (sites with q-value above
0.1). Contingency tables were corrected using Haldane correction (adding 0.5 to the cases with zero in one of the counts). Statistical
signiﬁcance was determined using a one-sided Fisher’s exact test, and the corresponding p-values were adjusted using the
Benjamini-Hochberg procedure. Then, for every kinase, the most signiﬁcant enrichment side (upregulated or downregulated) was
selected based on the adjusted p-value and presented in the volcano plots and bubble maps. In the volcano plots, signiﬁcant kinases
(q-value<=0.1) for both upregulated and downregulated analysis were plotted on both sides. Bubble maps were generated with size
and color strength representing the q-values and frequency factors, respectively, only displaying signiﬁcant kinases (q-value<=0.1).
Signiﬁcant kinases (q-value<=0.1) for both upregulated and downregulated analysis were plotted using the parameters of the more
signiﬁcant side. For example, as shown in Figure 5I, immune signaling in the protein-based pathway analysis matched the activity of
known immune-related kinases, such as MAPKAPK2/3/5, IKKB/E, and TBK1. Hypoxia was enriched at the protein level only in
ccRCC, similar to the activity pattern of the stress-related kinases PAK1-6.
Genetic driver alterations’ cis impact on RNA, proteome, and PTMs
Cis-effects are here deﬁned to be the effect of mutations in a particular cancer driver gene on the levels of RNA, protein, and phos-
phorylation corresponding to the same gene. To assess the impact of cancer driver mutations on RNA, protein, and phosphorylation,
scores were calculated for each driver event for cis effects. The cis-effect scores were calculated using the outputs of a linear regres-
sion modeling the effects of a particular driver gene mutation status on the protein abundance, RNA expression, or phosphorylation
corresponding to the gene.
Y = b0 + b1Mg + b2P + b3C + e
(Equation 6)
where Y denotes an (n x 1) vector containing either the protein abundance, the RNA expression, or phosphoproteomic level at a
residue pertaining to the driver gene, M is a binary vector indicating the driver mutation status for that particular driver gene (g) in a
tumor sample, and the tumor purity (P) calculated by ESTIMATE127 was also included as a covariate. For pan-cancer analyses, can-
cer type was one-hot encoded and was included as additional covariates C. The error ε is assumed to be normally distributed with a
constant variance s.
After running the model for each driver and determining the associated correlation and Benjamini-Hochberg FDR adjusted p-values
within each cancer type at each level of omics data, the cis-effect score was determined by multiplying the -log10(p-adj) by the sign of
the correlation coefﬁcient between the mutated driver and the effect on the omics. This retains the directionality of the mutated driver
on the target of interest, relative to samples that are wild-type for that cancer driver gene. This procedure was conducted broadly on
the pan-cancer level as well as in a tissue-speciﬁc manner. The top results for the pan-cancer cis-effects and the cohort-speciﬁc re-
sults are depicted in Figure 2B. In the case of phosphoproteomics, we kept the absolute highest score for each gene.
Similarity of drivers through trans-effects on proteome and PTMs
As opposed to cis-effects, trans-effects denote the impact that driver mutations have on RNA, protein, and phosphorylation levels not
corresponding to that of the mutated driver gene. Trans-effects were determined in this study by running a linear regression for each
ll
OPEN ACCESS
e10
Cell 186, 3921–3944.e1–e12, August 31, 2023
Article

cancer driver, similar to the process described above for the cis-effect score determination and the trans-effect regression model for
protein-protein interactions. For each cancer driver, all trans protein levels and PTM were tested with the following model:
Y = b0 + b1Mg + b2P + b3C + e
(Equation 7)
where Y is a (n x 1) vector representing the protein abundance of a given protein or the phosphorylation levels of a speciﬁc residue,
M is a binary vector indicating the driver mutation status for that particular driver gene (g) in a tumor sample, and the tumor purity
(P) calculated by ESTIMATE127 was also included as a covariate. For pan-cancer analyses, cancer type was one-hot encoded
and was included as an additional covariate (C). Lastly, the error ε is assumed to be normally distributed with a constant variance s.
For each driver, scores were assigned to all corresponding trans proteomic and phosphorylation events by multiplying the -log10(p)
of the association with driver mutation by the sign of the coefﬁcient, as was conducted for the cis-effect scores. To determine cancer
drivers that are associated with similar proteomic and phosphorylation changes when mutated, a ‘‘driverness similarity’’ calculation
was conducted for each pair of drivers. The scores of all the drivers’ events were compared to determine a holistic correlation be-
tween the two drivers, and the trans-events with scores more extreme than 5 or -5 for both drivers were highlighted (Figure 4A). The
distribution of similarity scores for all driver pairs is shown in Figure 4B.
Multi-omic signatures and clusterings
In this pan-cancer cohort, shared data types available for clustering were whole transcriptome RNA-seq, proteome, and phospho-
proteome. To harmonize the RNA data with the normally distributed proteomic data, we applied a normal inverse transformation,
median-centered the data, and stabilized using median absolute deviation. We subsetted for samples that had matched RNA, pro-
tein, and phosphoprotein in the entire dataset and concatenated these three matrices. To reduce the transcriptome space to a com-
parable feature size to the intersected proteome data, we selected the top 5,000 highly variable genes, ranked by the coefﬁcient of
variation. The combined matrix contained gene expression for 5,000 highly variable mRNA genes, 5,716 proteins, and 3,341 phos-
phoproteins. The description of SignatureAnalyzer conveyed the following details: (i) The overall rationale for the tool; (ii) Examples of
papers where the tool was successfully applied; (iii) The utilization of the tool in this paper; and (iv) Analysis of the robustness of sig-
natures concerning the cohort size which was provided in Geffen et al.168
C3PO
To explore the overall contribution of genomic variants to protein variability within cancer types, we built a combined polygenetic
protein abundance prediction algorithm for oncology, called C3PO. C3PO is largely based on polygenic risk scores (PRS),62–64 a
mathematical approach typically used to provide an additive germline polygenic score that correlates with disease risk in an individ-
ual. In other words, the PRS for any individual sample is calculated by summing the genome-wide genotypes, weighted by that ge-
notype’s effect size estimate. This can be represented by the following equation,
PR Si = S GijSj
(Equation 8)
where PRSi is the polygenic risk score for a single sample i; G is the genotype for the i-th sample at genomic position j (and can take
the values of 0, 1, or 2), multiplied by Sj the effect size that Gj contributes to disease. Thus, generating a summative sample-level risk
proﬁle score of disease for that sample.
Building on the PRS framework, we sought to determine the polygenic abundance prediction score for all of the proteins measured
in the proteome. A simple mathematic model to represent this step would be as follows:
C3POik = S GijSjk
(Equation 9)
where a C3PO score is calculated for each sample i and protein k as the sum of any somatic mutations G in a gene-network j
weighted by Gj‘s effect size (S) on protein k. Here Gj can take values of 0 or 1 as somatically mutated or not mutated. The range
of S takes the normalized units of protein abundance calculated by the CPTAC consortia. See above. Before moving on it is sufﬁcient
to expound on the methodology to calculate both G and S.
The concept of somatic mutations G across many samples breaks as a viable additive model because of the issue of a right-skewed
tail of somatic mutations in cancer genomes (Figure S1J). In other words, unlike common germline mutations where many samples
share the same germline mutations, shared somatic mutations are infrequent. To overcome this issue of rare mutations, as is often
performed with rare mutation analysis, we aggregated mutations into burden units based on NeSTed protein systems according to
Zheng et al.65 (Step 1, Figure S7A, variable G in equation). Brieﬂy, this hierarchical nested network was generated by integrating spatial
proximity measures from aggregate spatial transcriptomic and co-immunoprecipitation assays to generate nests of genes that work in
concert within the cell. Doing so provided broader coverage of the possible mutational impacts on protein (Figure S7A).
The second piece, effect size (S), of the standard PRS calculation was also altered in C3PO calculations. These are typically gener-
ated from population-based case-control datasets using genome-wide association studies (GWAS). Here, instead of a GWAS model
of cases and controls, C3PO estimates protein abundance effect sizes. More speciﬁcally, we used the Cohen’s D difference between
protein levels in altered vs. wild-type tumor samples from each cancer type and across all samples in CPTAC, i.e., pan-cancer mea-
sures (Step 2, Figure S7B, variable S in equation). Cohen’s D is generated by comparing samples with mutations in a NeSTed protein
system to those without mutations.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Cell 186, 3921–3944.e1–e12, August 31, 2023
e11
Article

Step 3 in our theoretical C3PO model was, to sum up our estimates to build a protein prediction score, or C3PO-score, for every
protein (k) in each sample (i). To perform this task, we built two matrices based on the previous two steps. We built these matrices
to avoid using computationally expensive for-loops. Our ﬁrst matrix captured genetically mutated NeSTs for each sample, i.e., a
0,1 matrix (Sample x Mutated-NeSTs). We then generated a second matrix capturing the effect sizes (Cohen’s D statistics) for each
NeST’s effect on protein abundance (NeST x Protein-abundance). In other words, we generated a weighted matrix that could be
used to supply the weights to our C3PO score. Only weights with p-values less than 0.1 were included (Step 3, Figure S7A). This al-
lowed for the aggregation of genetic alterations with smaller effects on protein levels to inﬂuence our model. Finally, the two observed
matrices were multiplied to produce a global proteomic prediction for each sample, i.e., a sample by protein matrix of C3PO scores.
This exercise was repeated for each substrate (DNA, CNA ampliﬁcation, and CNA deletion) and ultimately combined into a cumulative
CP3O prediction. Despite gross overtraining of this model, we estimated the Pearson correlation of C3PO and measured correlation
coefﬁcients for each substrate individually (Figure S7B) and collectively (Figure S7C). The explained variance reported in the manu-
script was calculated by taking the mean ﬂoor and mean ceiling of each C3PO substrate prediction. The trained weight matrix from
CPTAC was applied to somatic alterations from CCLE and CPTAC retrospective samples not included in this analysis.
Enrichment analysis was performed to associate high smoking scores with high C3PO scores in the chromatin modiﬁcation
pathway for LUAD samples. This was performed by taking the root-mean-squared of the smoking scores and chromatin modiﬁcation
scores generated by C3PO. Samples were classiﬁed as high if scaled scores were greater than zero and low if scores were less than
or equal to zero. Samples were placed in a 2x2 table for comparison using Pearson’s chi-squared test with Yates’ continuity correc-
tion. C3PO is available at https://github.com/MHBailey/C3PO_polygenic.
Proteomics data processing
The details are provided in Geffen et al.168
QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
RNA and protein quantiﬁcation
The process of RNA data processing and quantiﬁcation, as well as proteome quantiﬁcation, has been outlined in the sections titled
"RNA data processing and quantiﬁcation" and "Proteomics data processing", respectively. The statistical analysis methodology and
its corresponding details can be found both within the main text and in the relevant sections of the STAR Methods.
Gene expression, proteomic, and phosphoproteomic feature-associated markers
Proteogenomic data was used to perform pairwise differential analysis between groups of samples. We performed the T-test, Wil-
coxon rank-sum test, and limma-trend test to do the differential expression analysis for protein, phosphoprotein, and gene expres-
sion between the groups with and without a given feature at the cohort-speciﬁc level and pan-cancer level (adjusted by cancer type).
This analysis requires at least ﬁve samples in each group with non-missing values. P-values were adjusted using the Benjamini-
Hochberg FDR method.
Statistical power analysis of driver gene discovery
We compared the statistical power to identify genes with a signiﬁcantly elevated mutation rate (‘‘signiﬁcantly mutated genes’’) for
cancer types in common between The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) and CPTAC. The statistical power calculations used the cancer-
SeqStudy R package (https://github.com/KarchinLab/cancerSeqStudy).145 Similar to previous power calculations,1,169 we assumed
that the number of gene mutations followed a binomial distribution. The background mutation rate parameter (p=mutations per base)
was estimated for each cancer type by calculating the median exome-wide mutation rate across tumor samples, assuming for
simplicity 30,000,000 nucleotide bases in coding regions as potentially mutable. In line with our previous statistical power ana-
lyses,1,169 a weighting factor (default parameter) was used to correct for variability in mutation rate across genes and that not all mu-
tations can generate a non-silent mutation. A gene was considered statistically signiﬁcant at a family-wise error rate of 0.1. Calcu-
lations of the sample size required to achieve 90% statistical power were carried out for various mutation frequencies above the
background mutation rate, including 20%, 10%, 5%, and 2% of mutated tumor samples above the background mutation rate
(i.e., effect size=0.2, 0.1, 0.05, and 0.02, respectively) (Figure S1M).
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
Comprehensive information about the CPTAC program, including program initiatives, investigators, and datasets, are available at the
CPTAC program website: https://proteomics.cancer.gov/programs/cptac.
For the Pan-Cancer proteogenomics collection papers, along with links to the data and supplementary materials associated with
these publications, please visit the Proteomic Data Commons (PDC) at https://pdc.cancer.gov/pdc/cptac-pancancer.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
e12
Cell 186, 3921–3944.e1–e12, August 31, 2023
Article

Supplemental ﬁgures
(legend on next page)
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Article

Figure S1. Driver mutation annotation process and multi-omic clusters, related to Figure 1
(A) Violin plots showing the cancer-type pathway enrichment score distributions derived from single-sample gene set enrichment analysis (ssGSEA) on the
proteomic data in the immune system pathway, grouped by multi-omic clusters. One-way ANOVA p values are shown, and data are represented as mean ± CI.
(B) Overall survival (i.e., OS) difference between group A (i.e., clusters C and D) and group B (i.e., clusters A and B as the counterpart) in ccRCC indicated by
Kaplan-Meier plot. Log-rank test p = 0.01. A Cox proportional hazards model p value of 0.008 is attained after adjusting for age, sex, and tumor purity. Whiskers
represent ± 95% conﬁdence intervals of the hazard ratios.
(C) The violin plots compare the distribution of protein-based ssGSEA score (i.e., inﬂammatory response hallmark pathway) between the two ccRCC groups
depicted in B). A Wilcoxon signed-rank test p value of 0.00011 is attained. Data are represented as mean ± CI.
(D) Overall survival (i.e., OS) difference between the high group (inﬂammatory response ssGSEA upper quartile) and the low group (e.g., lower quartile) of the entire
ccRCC cohort indicated by the Kaplan-Meier plot. Log-rank test p value = 0.0027. A Cox proportional hazards model p value of 0.011 is attained after adjusting for
age, sex, and tumor purity. High, inﬂammatory response ssGSEA upper quartile; low, inﬂammatory response ssGSEA lower quartile.
(E) Kaplan-Meier plot indicating the association between overall survival and EMT ssGSEA score expression in the CPTAC GBM cohort. The high EMT ssGSEA
score (upper quartile of the cohort) is signiﬁcantly associated with poor survival, as indicated by the Log-rank test p value.
(F) Bar plot showing the number of predicted driver missense mutations by each of six methods, which is further stratiﬁed by whether the mutation was previously
known (blue) or not known (orange) to be oncogenic by OncoKB.
(G) Upset plot indicating the overlap in driver missense mutation predictions between computational methods.
(H) Bar plot showing the relationship between the number of computational methods predicting a missense mutation to be oncogenic and its support in OncoKB.
We used all six computational methods (STAR Methods) independently to classify the missense mutations and then tallied each mutation according to how many
independent callers identiﬁed it. The x axis indicates how many of these six methods identiﬁed an individual mutation as a putative driver. Missense mutations
called by more computational methods include a higher proportion of driver aberrations. The left panel shows the absolute numbers of mutations, and the right
panel presents the percentages of mutations in each category.
(I) Left, Venn diagram indicating overlap between the labeling of putative loss-of-function (pLOF) variants as oncogenic by either OncoKB (cancer type-agnostic)
or by tumor suppressor gene (TSG) classiﬁcations by the TCGA PancanAtlas (cancer-type-speciﬁc). Right, the correlation between gene length and frequency of
pLOF variants for the two pLOF oncogenicity annotation approaches. The shaded area represents 95% conﬁdence intervals.
(J) Bar plot showing the frequency of annotated driver mutations by gene, stratiﬁed by the type of mutation (pLOF, in-frame indel, or missense mutation).
(K) Venn diagram showing the overlap between oncogenicity annotations for copy-number alterations (CNAs) between OncoKB and the Cancer Gene
Census (CGC).
(L) Bar plot showing the log-odds ratio for gene fusions resulting in in-frame events, stratiﬁed by the type of driver gene (oncogene or tumor suppressor, TSG) and
by frequency of fusion event. Error bars represent ±1 SEM.
(M) Statistical power for detecting cancer driver genes at deﬁned fractions of tumor samples above the background mutation rate (effect size with 90% power) is
depicted. Circles indicate the ten cancer types in CPTAC and TCGA placed according to the study sample size and median background mutation rate.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Article

A
B
C
D
Figure S2. Supporting evidence for cis-effect of missense mutations, related to Figure 2
(A) Comparison of ARID1A protein abundance between the matched NATs and WT-tumor samples highlighted the consistency of our original pan-cancer
observation at the cohort level for most cancer types. Wilcoxon signed-rank test p values are shown. Boxes represent the interquartile range (IQR, e.g., median,
0.25, and 0.75 quantiles), and whiskers represent the largest and smallest values within the 1.5 3 IQR range.
(B) Boxplot showing PTEN phosphatase activity from a saturation mutagenesis screen in Mighell et al.38 for missense mutations with varying degrees of evidence
for oncogenicity in CPTAC. Wilcoxon signed-rank test p values are shown. **, p value < 0.01 and ****, p value < 0.0001. Boxes represent the interquartile range
(IQR, e.g., median, 0.25, and 0.75 quantiles), and whiskers represent the largest and smallest values within the 1.5 3 IQR range.
(C) Boxplot showing PTEN protein abundance from a saturation mutagenesis screen in Matreyek et al.39 for missense mutations with varying degrees of evidence
for oncogenicity in CPTAC. Wilcoxon signed-rank test p values are shown. *, p value < 0.05. Boxes represent the interquartile range (IQR, e.g., median, 0.25, and
0.75 quantiles), and whiskers represent the largest and smallest values within the 1.5 3 IQR range.
(D) Bar plot showing the cis-effect of missense mutations that are only computationally predicted to be oncogenic on protein abundance (normalized by RNA
expression). The dashed line indicates statistical signiﬁcance (q value < 0.05).
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Article

(legend on next page)
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Article

Figure S3. Inference of altered protein-protein interactions through protein co-variation analysis, related to Figure 3
(A) Pearson correlation of protein abundance between MSH2 and MSH6 in breast carcinoma (BRCA). The shaded area indicates the 95% conﬁdence interval of
the regression line. The correlation test p value is shown.
(B) Pearson correlation of protein abundance between CTNNB1 and CDH1 in four cancer types. The shaded area indicates the 95% conﬁdence interval of the
regression line. Correlation test p values are shown.
(C) Bar plot showing the statistical signiﬁcance from the mediation analysis for each driver gene (left side of label) impacted by copy-number alterations (CNAs) on
the abundance of a protein interactor (right side of label).
(D) Boxplot showing the distribution of mTOR protein abundance stratiﬁed by RICTOR copy-number status. Wilcoxon signed-rank test q value is shown. Boxes
represent the interquartile range (IQR, e.g., median, 0.25, and 0.75 quantiles), and whiskers represent the largest and smallest values within the 1.5 3 IQR range.
(E) Pearson correlation between the protein abundance of RICTOR and mTOR in tumor samples without a RICTOR ampliﬁcation.
(F) Distribution of CDK2 (left) and CCNE1 (right) protein abundance stratiﬁed by CCNE1 copy-number status. Wilcoxon signed-rank test q values are shown.
Boxes represent the interquartile range (IQR, e.g., median, 0.25, and 0.75 quantiles), and whiskers represent the largest and smallest values within the 1.5 3
IQR range.
(G) Pearson correlation between the protein abundance of CDK2 and CCNE1 in tumor samples without a CCNE1 ampliﬁcation. Correlation test p values are
shown, and r represents the Pearson correlation coefﬁcient.
(H) The Kinase Library enrichment for samples with CCNE1 ampliﬁcation vs. WT. Cell-cycle-related CDKs (CDK1-6) are signiﬁcantly enriched among samples
with CCNE1 ampliﬁcation. The x axis (log2FF) indicates the log2-ratio of the prediction frequency for each kinase between samples with CCNE1 ampliﬁcation vs.
WT, and the y axis indicates the statistical signiﬁcance based on Fisher’s exact test.
(I) Quantile-quantile plots for the p value distribution on permuted (left) or observed (right) data for the interaction term regression model for the inﬂuence of driver
mutations on protein-protein interactions.
(J) Distribution of the number of signiﬁcant events from the interaction term regression model on 1,000 permuted data sets (blue) vs. the observed (red line).
(K) Subsampling analysis showing the number of signiﬁcant events from the interaction term regression model as the data size increases.
(L) Scatterplot showing the correlation between LEF1 and CTNNB1 protein levels, stratiﬁed by whether the tumor has an oncogenic mutation in CTNNB1.
(M) Scatterplot showing the correlation between ARID2 and PBRM1 protein levels, stratiﬁed by whether the tumor has an oncogenic mutation in PBRM1.
(N) Scatterplot showing the correlation between phosphatase 2A regulatory subunits (PPP2R5D and PPP2R5B) and PPP2R1A protein levels, stratiﬁed by whether
the tumor has an oncogenic mutation in PPP2R1A. Correlation test p values are shown, and r represents the Pearson correlation coefﬁcient in Figures S3L–S3N.
(O) Overlap in signiﬁcant events from the interaction term regression model when using proteomics vs. RNA-seq data.
(P) Volcano plot to summarize the PPIs signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced by phosphorylation levels at an interface site in one of the corresponding proteins, with the site
indicated in parenthesis. Pan-cancer tests accounted for the cohort as a covariate in the model.
(Q) Mapping the EGFR T693 phosphorylation site onto a 3D model of the EGFR homodimer shows that the site falls on the intracellular interface where the dimers
interact.
(R) A scatterplot indicates how phosphorylation at EGFR T693 inﬂuences the correlation between EGFR and GRK2 protein levels. Correlation test p values are
shown, and r represents the Pearson correlation coefﬁcient.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Article

(legend on next page)
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Article

Figure S4. Kinase activity analysis of driver genes across different tissues and at the pan-cancer level, related to Figure 4
(A) Lolliplot showing the alterations in EGFR observed in CPTAC. Numbers in lollipops indicate the number of tumor samples with that alteration in the entire
cohort.
(B) Full Kinase Library enrichment analysis landscape across multiple driver genes at the pan-cancer level. For each kinase and driver, the color of the bubble
(log2FF) indicates the log2-ratio of the prediction frequency for that kinase between the mutated tumor compared with the WT tumor at the pan-cancer level, and
the size of the bubble denotes the statistical signiﬁcance based on Fisher’s exact test.
(C) Full landscape of the Kinase Library enrichment analysis of EGFR-, KRAS-, and STK11-mutated tumors compared to WT in LUAD. For each kinase and driver,
the color of the bubble (log2FF) indicates the log2-ratio of the prediction frequency for that kinase between the mutated tumor compared with the WT tumor in
LUAD, and the size of the bubble denotes the statistical signiﬁcance based on Fisher’s exact test.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Article

Figure S5. Analysis of normal-adjacent tissue identiﬁes key protein changes for oncogenic pathways, related to Figure 5
(A) The ssGSEA scores of the immune system and extracellular matrix organization show statistically signiﬁcant Pearson correlations with the immune score, and
stromal score from ESTIMATE, respectively. Correlation test p values are shown, and r represents the Pearson correlation coefﬁcient.
(B) The distribution of the MSI category in each cancer type is displayed in the boxplot colored by the categories of microsatellite stable (MSS) vs. microsatellite
instable (MSI-high). Boxes represent the interquartile range (IQR, e.g., median, 0.25, and 0.75 quantiles), and whiskers represent the largest and smallest values
within the 1.5 3 IQR range.
(C) The nonsense-mediated decay ssGSEA pathway score is enriched in the MSI-high group, followed by the MSS group. Wilcoxon signed-rank test p value of
9.6e06 is attained.
(legend continued on next page)
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Article

(D) Protein-based ssGSEA scores of transcriptional regulation by TP53 are signiﬁcantly more highly expressed in tumors than that of NATs of all eight cancer
types and in GBM compared with GTEx normal samples. Wilcoxon signed-rank test p values are shown. Within the violin plots, the dots represent the mean, and
solid lines indicate the error limit deﬁned by the 95% conﬁdence interval. The violin plot outlines demonstrate the kernel probability.
(E) Different enriched pathways in each cancer type based on the DEPs detected only in the corresponding cancer type. Hypergeometric test false discovery rate
(FDR)-adjusted p value was attained.
(F) Full landscape of kinase activity across eight cancer types based on the Kinase Library, comparing tumors to their corresponding NATs. For each kinase and
tumor type, the color of the bubble (log2FF) indicates the log2-ratio of the prediction frequency for that kinase between the tumor and its corresponding NAT, and
the size of the bubble denotes the statistical signiﬁcance based on Fisher’s exact test.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Article

(legend on next page)
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Article

Figure S6. Analysis of neoantigen burden, kinase activity, and drug sensitivity, related to Figure 6
(A) Left, Violin plot showing the distribution of the fraction of somatic mutations indels for MSS vs. MSI-high tumors. Right, the cumulative number of the predicted
neoantigens for single-nucleotide variants (SNV) compared with indels. Wilcoxon signed-rank test p values are shown. ****p value < 0.0001. Within the violin plots,
the dots represent the mean, and solid lines indicate the error limit deﬁned by the 95% conﬁdence interval. The violin plot outlines demonstrate the kernel
probability.
(B) Left, cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL) score correlation with log2-transformed neoantigen burden. The p value reﬂects a Wald test after adjusting for cancer type
as a covariate. The shaded area represents 95% conﬁdence intervals (left); right, correlation of CD8 T cell score from CIBERSORT (Absolute) with log2-trans-
formed neoantigen burden. The p value reﬂects a Wald test after adjusting for cancer type as a covariate. The shaded area represents 95% conﬁdence intervals.
(C) Pearson correlation of neoantigen burden and inferred T cell inﬁltration (CTL score) for genes expressed at different RNA levels.
(D) Cis-effect of copy-number ampliﬁcations on the RNA-, protein- and the phosphorylation-level. Red indicates increased expression, while blue indicates
decreased expression. Tiles are colored according to the score of the cis-effect from red (positive scores) to blue (negative scores). Signed log10(p), multiplying
the direction of the coefﬁcient by the log10 of the adjusted p value (capped at ±10).
(E) Boxplot comparing the variability in expression for proteins that have ampliﬁcations (oncogenes) or deletions (tumor suppressors) compared with wild-type
tumors. Each dot represents the standard deviation of protein abundance for a particular oncogene/tumor suppressor. Wilcoxon signed-rank test p values are
shown. Boxes represent the interquartile range (IQR, e.g., median, 0.25, and 0.75 quantiles), and whiskers represent the largest and smallest values within the
1.5 3 IQR range.
(F) Full landscape of the Kinase Library enrichment results across multiple CNAs at the pan-cancer level. For each kinase and driver, the color of the bubble
(log2FF) indicates the log2-ratio of the prediction frequency for that kinase between the tumor with the CNA compared to the WT tumor at the pan-cancer level,
and the size of the bubble denotes the statistical signiﬁcance based on Fisher’s exact test.
(G) Genome track of the CDK2 locus for RB1 chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) sequencing from three previous studies. Normalized coverage means reads
per million.
(H) Heatmap scoring how close RB1 ChIP-seq peaks are to cell-cycle-related genes (CDK1-6, cyclins A–E). The potential regulatory score weights the number
and proximity of ChIP-seq peaks to the gene’s transcription start site. The potential regulatory score was normalized for each dataset, so the maximum is 1.
(I) Volcano plot showing genes with differential dependencies in RB1-altered cell lines from DepMap’s CRISPR KO screens. Effect size is the beta coefﬁcient from
the linear regression model used in the statistical test. Green dots indicate cell-cycle-related genes (CDK1-6, cyclins A–E).
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Article

(legend on next page)
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Article

Figure S7. Overview of C3PO and its performance in orthogonal datasets, related to Figure 7
(A) The overview of the C3PO process includes the following step: (1) We used a nested gene relationship architecture to classify altered and unaltered genes. We
do ’his to improve upon the long tail of altered genes in cancer; (2) The Cohen’s D statistic is used to proxy the effect size in each altered nest and substrate; (3)
Effect size matrices are calculated for each genomic substrate (DNA, can ampliﬁcation, and can deletions); (4) We validated this process in multiple independent
cohorts [cancer cell-line encyclopedia (CCLE) and TCGA]; (5) The circle displays how we translate protein activity into hallmark-level scores. The equations within
the circle indicate the combined polygenic equations used to generate the various scores.
(B) C3PO protein activity scores were correlated for all proteins measured in CPTAC. Displayed is the distribution of the correlation coefﬁcients attributable to
each substrate: DNA (blue), copy-number ampliﬁcation (AMP, pink), and copy-number deletion (DEL, green) for each cancer type, including the aggregate pan-
cancer-trained predictions. The vertical red bar indicates zero correlation.
(C) Combined C3PO protein activity scores were also calculated and correlated with measured protein. Distributions of correlation coefﬁcients are presented for
each cancer type, including pan-cancer-trained predictions. The vertical red bar indicates zero correlation.
(D) Similar to (B), C3PO weighted activity matrices were applied to two orthogonal datasets, CPTAC-retrospective samples (TCGA) and 350 cancer cell-line
encyclopedia (CCLE) for three cancer types: ovarian (HGSC), breast carcinoma (BRCA), and colorectal tumors (COAD). Similar to (B), predicted protein activity
was correlated with measured protein. The vertical red bar indicates zero correlation.
(E) Like (C), combined protein activity predictions were correlated with measured protein. The vertical red bar indicates zero correlation.
(F) QQ plots were used to display all p values generated from Pearson correlations in (D) and (E) for ovarian samples. QQ plots for each substrate were plotted
(DNA, top-left; copy-number ampliﬁcation, top-right; copy-number deletion, bottom-left; and combined scores, bottom-right). Inﬂated p values were interpreted
as the capacity of C3PO to accurately predict protein activity above the expected p value distribution for the number of tests performed. Thus, the higher the p
value inﬂation, the more accurate C3PO predictions are in identifying correlations with genomic alteration and protein activity. Lambda provides the inﬂations.
Lambda (l) values measure p value distributions above the expected distribution of tests performed.
(G) Similar to (F). QQ plots and lambda values are presented for each substrate in breast cancer.
(H) The circos plots show 21 cancer hallmark pathways for each cancer type. Icons indicate relationships to the original hallmarks outlined by Hanahan and
Weinberg66. Every sample in CPTAC is represented by the links connecting hallmarks and is colored according to cancer type. Each sample is displayed using
one line according to their top two hallmark activity scores generated by ssGSEA.
(I) The circos plots show 21 cancer hallmark pathways for each cancer type. Icons indicate relationships to the original hallmarks outlined by Hanahan and
Weinberg66. Every sample in CPTAC is represented by the links connecting hallmarks and is colored according to cancer type. Each sample is displayed using
three lines according to their top three hallmark activity scores generated by C3PO.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Article
