Comment on “The Consensus
Coding Sequences of Human
Breast and Colorectal Cancers”
Gad Getz,1*† Holger Höfling,2* Jill P. Mesirov,1 Todd R. Golub,1,3,4,5,6
Matthew Meyerson,1,3 Robert Tibshirani,2,7 Eric S. Lander1,6,8
Sjöblom et al. (Research Article, 13 October 2006, p. 268) reported nearly 200 novel cancer genes said
to have a 90% probability of being involved in colon or breast cancer. However, their analysis raises
two statistical concerns. When these concerns are addressed, few genes with significantly elevated
mutation rates remain. Although the biological methodology in Sjöblom et al. is sound, more samples
are needed to achieve sufficient power.
S
jöblom et al. (1) reported the first genome-
wide effort to identify genes mutated in can-
cer. They also introduced a two-stage design
in which they screened a large set of genes (13,023)
for somatic mutations in a discovery set (11 breast
and 11 colorectal cancers) and then screened only
the small subset of genes that harbored at least one
somatic mutation in a validation set (24 breast or
colorectal tumors). They identified genes as can-
didate cancer genes (CAN genes) by applying a
statistical model designed to assess the likelihood
that the observed somatic nonsynonymous muta-
tions would occur by chance. The approach em-
ployed the false discovery rate (FDR) approach of
Benjamini and Hochberg (2) and used an assumed
background mutation rate of m = 1.2 × 10−6.
The Sjöblom et al. analysis yielded rank-
ordered lists of candidate genes with 122 and 69
genes in breast and colorectal cancers, respec-
tively. These genes were said to have a 90%
chance of being true cancer genes, that is, harbor-
ing mutations at a frequency significantly greater
than expected by chance, based on the FDR ap-
proach (that is, FDR ≤10%). Reassuringly, 6
genes known to be mutated in these cancer types
appear at the top of these lists (1 in breast and 5 in
colon cancer). Extrapolating from these lists to
the entire genome, the authors estimate that the
total number of genes harboring important so-
matic mutations in breast and colon cancer, re-
spectively, exceeds 189 and 107 genes, with the
typical tumor carrying 14 and 20 mutations.
These observations are of great interest because
the number of genes is much higher than pre-
viously thought. However, this analysis raises two
methodological concerns that, when addressed,
eliminate the statistical evidence for almost all of
the yet unknown candidate cancer genes.
First, the authors incorrectly apply the FDR
formula. The formula requires the tail probabil-
ities [Prob(X ≥T)] as input, but Sjöblom et al.
instead use the point probabilities [Prob(X = T)].
Consequently, their probabilities are smaller than
they should be and therefore falsely appear to be
more significant. When P values rather than point
probabilities are used, the number of candidate
genes falls from 122 to 6 in breast cancer and
from 69 to 28 in colorectal cancer.
Second, the analysis is highly sensitive to the
background mutation rate m used in the statistical
model (see Supporting Online Material). Differ-
ent tumors and cell lines may have different
background mutation rates, and accurate estima-
tion of m requires large amounts of sequence data
generated from the same tumor population.
Sjöblom et al. estimated m based on a different,
smaller data set. However, an estimate based on
their own data yields substantially higher muta-
tion rates—by factors of about 1.9 and 1.4 in
breast and colorectal cancers, respectively (esti-
mated in two ways; see SOM). If these rates are
inserted into the analysis, the number of candi-
date genes falls to only 1 for breast cancer and 11
for colorectal cancer. Only four of these genes
were not previously reported as mutated in cancer.
We also note that the analysis assumes that m is
constant across the genome. It is well known that
the germline mutation rate shows regional varia-
tion (see SOM), and similar variation could be
estimated in cancer from silent mutations in adja-
cent sites. Such variation would bias the discovery
screen to select genes with higher background mu-
tation rates; therefore, an increased effective va-
lue of m should be used in calculating significance.
Allowing for plausible variation among genes
(CV = 0.4) would increase the effective value of
m by a factor of more than 1.3. The candidate lists
would be reduced to only known cancer genes.
We note that the authors have recently per-
formed a simulation study (3) based on the em-
pirical Bayes or plug-in approach of Efron et al.
(4) as an alternative way to estimate the FDR of
their gene lists. The results are said to indicate
that the results of Sjöblom et al. are conservative,
that is, that the true FDR is even lower than 10%.
However, we have discovered that their simulation
study contains a subtle but important statistical
shortcoming (SOM). Specifically, their analysis
uses a score (CaMP score) for each gene that is
highly sensitive to the presence of true cancer
genes in the data. Therefore, a simulation that
assumes no true cancer genes cannot be used to
estimate the FDR in settings in which even a single
true cancer gene exists. Replacing their CaMP
score with one that does not suffer from this
functional dependency among genes yields much
higher FDRs.
We emphasize that the mathematical short-
comings discussed above do not simply reflect
different but reasonable approaches to the analysis
but are fundamental statistical problems.
We also suggest other statistical tests to detect
candidate cancer genes, some of which are more
powerful than the one above (see SOM, Appendi-
ces A to D). Using our estimated background mu-
tation rates, even these more powerful tests yield
few candidate genes.
After correcting the statistical analysis and
using a background mutation rate that better fits
the data, one cannot conclude that the ~200 candi-
date genes reported in Sjöblom et al. have >90%
probability of being cancer-related. The issue is
simply one of statistical power: Much larger sam-
ple sizes are required to detect cancer genes. With
smaller sample sizes, most candidate genes are
expected to be false positives. Nevertheless, we
strongly support the authors’ experimental ap-
proach and urge its adoption in future large-scale
cancer genome sequencing efforts. We suspect that
there are indeed many more important cancer genes
waiting to be discovered, some of which may well
be on the lists of Sjöblom et al. In the end, statis-
tical validation of a candidate gene will require
study of large samples to show such properties as
a high frequency of mutations and a high ratio of
nonsynonymous to synonymous mutations.
References and Notes
1. T. Sjöblom et al., Science 314, 268 (2006).
2. Y. Benjamini, Y. Hochberg, J. Roy. Statist. Soc. Ser.
B. Methodological 57, 289 (1995).
3. G. Parmigiani et al., Johns Hopkins University, Dept. of
Biostatistics Working Papers. Working Paper 126,
www.bepress.com/jhubiostat/paper126 (December 2006).
4. B. Efron et al., J. Am. Stat. Assoc. 96, 1151 (2001).
5. This work was supported in part by the Broad Institute of
Harvard and MIT and by grants from the National Cancer
Institute, the National Human Genome Research Institute,
the National Institute of General Medical Sciences, NSF,
and Howard Hughes Medical Institute. H. H. was
supported by a Stanford Graduate Fellowship.
Supporting Online Material
www.sciencemag.org/cgi/content/full/317/5844/1500b/DC1
SOM Text
Figs. S1 and S2
Tables S1 to S7
Data Tables
References
11 December 2006; accepted 22 August 2007
10.1126/science.1138764
TECHNICAL COMMENT
1Broad Institute of Massachusetts Institute of Technology and
Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA. 2Depart-
ment of Statistics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305,
USA. 3Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
4Department of Medicine, Children’s Hospital Boston, Boston,
MA 02115, USA. 5Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy
Chase, MD 20815, USA. 6Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA
02115, USA. 7Department of Health Research and Policy,
Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA. 8Whitehead
Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.
*These authors contributed equally to this work.
†To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail:
gadgetz@broad.mit.edu
14 SEPTEMBER 2007
VOL 317
SCIENCE
www.sciencemag.org
1500b
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Massachusetts Institute of Technology on May 16, 2024
